<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head><link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>Glossary</title>
</head>
<body class="body0" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="backmatter glossary">
<p class="double center" id="top"><span class="size_xl bold">Glossary</span></p>

<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p class="double center flushleft"><a href="#a">A</a> <a href="#baklavas">B</a> <a href="#chalkeosaion">C</a> <a href="#daimon">D</a> <a href="#e">E</a> <a href="#failedwanderer">F</a> <a href="#gala">G</a> <a href="#hadeios">H</a> <a href="#iatrike">I</a> J <a href="#kai">K</a> <a href="#labrys">L</a> <a href="#machetes">M</a> <a href="#name">N</a> <a href="#obeliskos">O</a> <a href="#paideia">P</a> Q <a href="#rhabdos">R</a> <a href="#sakcharon">S</a> <a href="#technike">T</a> U V <a href="#wanderers">W</a> <a href="#xenia">X</a> Y <a href="#zoe">Z</a></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="double flushleft text">

<p><i><a href="#noeikalos">Nóei kalôs</a>: </i>In an attempt to communicate most clearly in this <a href="#drama">dramatic</a> monologue, I have used a combination of <i><a href="#ennoia">énnoiai</a>, <a href="#lexis">léxeis</a>, <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#phantasia">phantasíai</a>: </i><a href="#ennoia">concepts</a>, <a href="#lexis">words</a>, and <a href="#phantasia">visions</a>.</p>

<p>It is likely that <a href="#tis">some</a> of these <a href="#ennoia">concepts</a> are <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> to you. Moreover, the <a href="#lexis">words</a> are in various <a href="#glossa">languages</a> while you are evidently a <i><a href="#monoglottos">monóglōttos</a>. </i>And, I suspect, even <a href="#tis">some</a> of the <a href="#phantasia">visions</a> might be perplexing without further context. Therefore, it seems prudent to leave with you also this recording of a few brief explanatory notes to aid in your comprehension.</p>

<p>It will become painfully obvious, even to you, that your <a href="#glossa">language</a> is merely a corruption of <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a>. </i>Not only are there <a href="#poly">many</a> direct cognates, there are also a <i><a href="#plethora">plēthṓra</a> </i>of common <a href="#lexis">words</a> used with minimal modification, such as ‹plethora›.</p>

<p>To aid in this <a href="#anagnorisis">recognition</a>, I have helpfully pointed these cognates out, and also included plural <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, such as <i><a href="#gala">gálakta</a>, </i>even when they are almost exclusively used in the singular. I <a href="#heurisko">find</a> it <a href="#apokalypsis">revealing</a> that <a href="#poly">many</a> of the preserved <a href="#lexis">words</a> are found only in the vocabulary of the most educated, such as <a href="#philosophos">philosophers</a> and <a href="#iatrike">healers</a>.</p>

<p>You will, of course, <a href="#anagnorisis">recognize</a> that <i>‹elliniká› — </i>or as you call it, ‹Greek› — bears an even closer resemblance to <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a>. </i>However, while <a href="#tis">somewhat</a> <a href="#katharmos">purer</a>, it nonetheless differs in key <a href="#praktikos">ways</a>, which are too numerous to list here. Suffice it to say that it has been dumbed down and corrupted by <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Nonetheless, I assume that you — being educated as a <a href="#polites">citizen</a>, not a <i><a href="#doule">doúlē</a> — </i>have at least a typical layman’s <a href="#gnosis">knowledge</a> of ‹Greek›, and so what follows should be clear even to you.</p>

<p>In <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a>, </i>as in <a href="#tis">any</a> civilized tongue, <a href="#lexis">words</a> are inflected in various grammatical <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. Just as verbs are, obviously, conjugated by tense, mood, <a href="#phone">voice</a>, person, and number; nouns are declined to indicate gender, number, and case. And, of course, their adjectives, pronouns, and articles are likewise declined to match. Thus, there is no need to list <a href="#pas">every</a> possible inflection of each <a href="#lexis">word</a>, and so I do not.</p>

<p>You are a <a href="#xenos">foreigner</a>, not an idiot, so it will suffice — for those <a href="#lexis">words</a> which are inflected by declension — to select the most appropriate gender and list the singular and plural of its nominative case. No doubt you will puzzle out the <a href="#treis">trio</a> of declension patterns. Likewise, verbs are left in the <a href="#protos">first</a>-person singular present active indicative <a href="#morphe">form</a>, for simplicity. Presumably, you will at least be able to follow the conjugations.</p>

<p>True to my <a href="#physis">nature</a>, I have endeavored to be <a href="#sophos">scholarly</a> and precise, avoiding <a href="#tis">any</a> hint of <i><a href="#paretymologia">paretymología</a>. </i>As for the <i><a href="#orthographia">orthographía</a>, </i>I trust that it will be self-evident even to you. My writing, you will see, is comprehensive, impartial, and <a href="#oudeteron">neutral</a>: without ever talking down to you, much less dealing insult. Nor will there be <a href="#tis">anything</a> extraneous, nor self-serving, nor arbitrary.</p>

<p>For I am as fair and balanced in this glossary as I am in <a href="#pas">all</a> matters, so there shall not be <a href="#tis">any</a> taint of ethnocentrism nor cultural chauvinism nor bigotry. Nor will there be <a href="#tis">any</a> editorializing, much less little in-jokes and Easter eggs. I am far too serious for such frivolity<i>!</i></p>

<p>Our one-sided conversation has been a special pleasure, and so I leave you with these <a href="#lexis">words</a> by which I may be <a href="#anamnesis">remembered</a>:</p>

<p class="single">&#xA0;</p>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="a"><i>á<br/>án</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A‑ or an‑. Literally, “a‑” or “an‑”. Still more literally, “not”, “without”. The <a href="#protos">first</a> <a href="#morphe">form</a> is used before consonants, the <a href="#dyo">second</a> before vowels and some rough-breathing consonants. No relation to ‹a›, ‹an›, <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹a‑›, ‹an‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="abode">abode</span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>The <a href="#oikos">home</a> of a <a href="#theos">god</a>: their <a href="#demesne">demesne</a>. A <a href="#theos">divine</a> <a href="#aletheia">reality</a>, virtually unlimited. See also: <i><a href="#aither">aithḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="adamantosaion"><i>Adámantos Aiṓn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “diamond aeon”, combining <i>adámās, <a href="#aion">aiṓn</a>. </i>Still more literally, “unbreakable age”. The Diamond Age of <a href="#poiesis">creation</a>. No relation to ‹Adam›, ‹Adama›, ‹Adam Ant›. Related to the cognates of ‹adamant›, ‹adamantine›, ‹Adamantios›, ‹diamond›, ‹diamantiferous›, ‹diamondiferous›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aer"><i>aḗr<br/>aéres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Air. Literally, “air”. Cognate of ‹air›, ‹aero‑›, ‹aer‑›; related to the cognate of ‹aerial>. See also: <i><a href="#atmos">atmós</a>, <a href="#anathermaer">anathermāḗr</a></i>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aerionismenos"><i>aḗr ionisménos<br/>aéres ionisménoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ionized air. Literally, “ionized air”, combining <i><a href="#aer">aḗr</a>, ión.</i> A <i><a href="#plasma">plásma</a> </i>of <i><a href="#aer">aḗr</a>, </i>nearly as conductive as <a href="#chalkos">copper</a>. See: <i><a href="#aither">aithḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="agalma"><i>ágalma<br/>agálmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Agalma. Literally, “agalma”. Still more literally, “object of glorification”. A <a href="#glypton">statue</a>, <a href="#phantasia">image</a>, or idol of a <a href="#theos">god</a> <a href="#poiesis">made</a> to honor and delight Them. Cognate of ‹agalma›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="agape"><i>agápē<br/>agápai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Agape. Literally, “agape”. Selfless, unconditional <a href="#love">love</a> — the <a href="#akros">highest</a> <a href="#morphe">form</a>. <a href="#heis">One</a> can only <a href="#euche">pray</a> that the subject proves worthy of it. No relation to ‹agape›, the heteronym meaning “wide open”. Cognate of ‹agape›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="agathos"><i>agathós<br/>agathoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Agatho‑. Literally, “agatho‑”. Still more literally, “good”, “noble”, “kind”, or “virtuous”. Both moral good and being good at a task. Cognate of ‹agatho‑›, ‹agath‑›; related to the cognates of ‹Agatha›, ‹agathism›, ‹agathokakological›, ‹agathodaemon›. See also: <i><a href="#panagathos">panágathos</a>, <a href="#eu">eû</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="agon"><i>agṓn<br/>agônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Agon. Literally, “agon”. Still more literally, “gathering” or “assembly”. A contest, competition, or conflict, whether <a href="#athletes">sporting</a>, <a href="#theatron">theatrical</a>, <a href="#philosophia">philosophical</a>, or <a href="#tis">some</a> combination. Cognate of ‹agon›; related to the cognates of ‹agony›, ‹agonist›, ‹antagonist›. See also: <i><a href="#athletes">athlētḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="agora"><i>agorā́<br/>agoraí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Agora. Literally, “agora”. The marketplace, public square, and place of assembly that <a href="#morphe">forms</a> the hub of the <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>. </i>At its center is the <i><a href="#akropolis">Akrópolis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹agora›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="agoraios"><i>Agoraîos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “pertaining to the agora”, referencing <i><a href="#agora">agorā́</a>. </i>An <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>associated with <i><a href="#dolios">Dólios</a>, </i>identifying His <a href="#domain">domain</a> as Patron of the Market; oft used an as <i><a href="#epiklesis">epiklḗsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aichme"><i>aichmḗ<br/>aichmaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “tip”, “spearpoint”, or “sharp edge”, referring to <i><a href="#akros">ákros</a>. </i>Typically, the tip of the <i><a href="#dory">dóry</a>. </i>Metaphorically, the leading edge of attack, such as the vanguard of an army. Related to the cognates of ‹acumen›, ‹acme›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aigis"><i>aigís<br/>aigídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aegis. Literally, “aegis”, referencing <i><a href="#aix">aíx</a>. </i>Still more literally, “goatskin”, referring to a <a href="#himation">cloak</a> <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of goat hide. A <a href="#prostates">protective</a> <a href="#himation">cloak</a> or <a href="#aspis">shield</a>, <a href="#physikon">physical</a> or <a href="#metaphysikon">metaphysical</a>. Cognate of ‹aegis›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#aspis">aspís</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ailouros"><i>aílouros<br/>aílouroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ailuro‑. Literally, “ailuro‑”, combining <i><a href="#aiolos">aiólos</a>, ourá. </i>Still more literally, “swift-tailed”. Even more literally, “cat”. Like a <i><a href="#leon">léōn</a>, </i>only better, for it is the most pleasing of <i><a href="#morphe">morphaí</a>. </i>Somehow, no relation to ‹alluring›. Cognate of ‹ailuro‑›, ‹ailur‑›, ‹aeluro‑›, ‹aelur‑›; related to the cognates of ‹ailurophile›, ‹ailurophobe›, ‹ailuromancy›. Meow.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ainigma"><i>ainígma<br/>ainígmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aenigma. Literally, “aenigma”. Still more literally, “riddle-speaking”, hence a confusing problem to be solved. Cognate of ‹aenigma›, ‹enigma›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aiolopyle"><i>aiolopýlē<br/>aiolopýlai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aeolipyle. Literally, “aeolipyle”, combining <i><a href="#aiolos">aiólos</a>, <a href="#pyle">pýlē</a>. </i>Still more literally, “wind gate”. A turbine which spins when the central water container is <a href="#therme">heated</a>, venting <a href="section-glossary.xhtml#atmos">steam</a> through bent tubes. No idea who <i>‹Íron› </i>might be, though he <a href="#phone">sounds</a> heroic. Cognate of ‹aeolipyle›, ‹aeolipylus›, ‹aeolipile›, ‹aeolipilus›, ‹eolipile›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head italic" id="aiolos"><i>aiólos<br/>aióloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aeolian. Literally, “aeolian”. Still more literally, “swift”, “shifting”, “nimble”, oft alluding to wind. There are <a href="#okto">Eight</a> Winds. No relation to ‹aileron›. Cognate of ‹aeolic›, ‹aeolian›, ‹eolian›. See also: <i><a href="#ailouros">aílouros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aion"><i>aiṓn<br/>aiṓnes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aeon. Literally, “aeon”. An immeasurably or indefinitely long period of time: an age, an eternity. No relation to ‹ion› or <i><a href="#aerionismenos">ionisménos</a>. </i>Note also that this term is used in preference to the more traditional <i><a href="#genos">génos</a>, </i>as the learned have long rejected the notion that the <a href="#anthropos">people</a> of each age differed in biology. Cognate of ‹aeon›, ‹eon›. See also: <i><a href="#adamantosaion">Adámantos Aiṓn</a>, <a href="#chalkeosaion">Chálkeos Aiṓn</a>, <a href="#aioniosstasis">Aiṓnios Stásis</a>, <a href="#chryseosaion">Chrýseos Aiṓn</a>, <a href="#skoteinosaion">Skoteinòs Aiṓn</a>, <a href="#oreichalkosaion">Oreíchalkos Aiṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aioniosstasis"><i>Aiṓnios Stásis<br/>Aiṓnioi Stáseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “aeon of stasis”, combining <i><a href="#aion">aiṓn</a>, <a href="#stasis">stásis</a>. </i>The Eternal Pause, or the Immobilized Age; perhaps also the Age of Strife. This is the current era, when — aside from that brief interruption — the <a href="#theos">gods</a> prevent inharmonious <a href="#meta">change</a>. Depending on which <a href="#philosophos">philosophers</a> of <i><a href="#politikon">politiká</a> </i>you agree with, this either preserves order or causes stagnation and conflict. Contrast with: <i><a href="#chryseosaion">Chrýseos Aiṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aither"><i>aithḗr<br/>aithéres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aether. Literally, “aether”. Still more literally, “blazing”. Metaphorically, of or relating to the gods. Specifically, celestial <i><a href="#aer">aḗr</a>, </i>which fills the <a href="#abode">abode</a> of a <a href="#theos">god</a>. No relation to the homonym referring to an anesthetic. See also: <i><a href="#pemptostoicheion">pémpto stoicheîon</a>, <a href="#aerionismenos">aḗr ionisménos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹aether›, ‹ether›; related to the cognates of ‹aethereal›, ‹ethereal›, ‹Ethernet›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aix"><i>aíx<br/>aîges</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “goat”. A noble <a href="#ther">beast</a>, and economically important at that. Related to the cognates of ‹Aegean›, ‹aegagrus›. See also: <i><a href="#aigis">aigís</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="akrates"><i>akratḗs<br/>akrateîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “without strength”, hence powerless, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#akratos">ákratos</a>, </i>despite the irony. Related to the cognates of ‹acratic›, ‹akratic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="akratos"><i>ákratos<br/>ákratoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “unmixed”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#krater">kratḗr</a>. </i>Wine that has not, as is customary among civilized <a href="#prosopon">individuals</a>, been diluted with water in a <i><a href="#krater">kratḗr</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#akrates">akratḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="akrolithos"><i>akrólithos<br/>akrólithoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Acrolith. Literally, “acrolith”, combining <i><a href="#akros">ákros</a>, <a href="#lithos">líthos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “outermost stone”. A <a href="#glypton">statue</a> <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of wood dressed in fabric, with only the extremities in painted <a href="#lithos">stone</a>. Cognate of ‹acrolith›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="akropolis"><i>Akrópolis<br/>akropóleis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Acropolis. Literally, “acropolis”, combining <i><a href="#akros">ákros</a>, <a href="#polis">pólis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “high city”. The <a href="#hyper">raised</a>, fortified center of the city. Surrounded by the <i><a href="#agora">agorā́</a>, </i>it is <a href="#polis">home</a> to <a href="#polis">civic</a> <a href="#tektaino">buildings</a> such as <i><a href="#prytaneion">Prytaneîon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹acropolis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="akros"><i>ákros<br/>ákroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Acro‑. Literally, “acro‑”. Still more literally, “peak”, “topmost”, or “at the extremity”. Cognate of ‹acro‑›; related to the cognates of ‹acrophobia›, ‹acrobat›, ‹acme›. See also: <i><a href="#akropolis">Akrópolis</a>, <a href="#akrolithos">akrólithos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="alabastron"><i>alábastron<br/>alábastra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alabastron. Literally, “alabastron”. Still more literally, “made of alabaster”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. A small bottle or vase, suitable for perfumes or <a href="#elaion0">oils</a> in <a href="#amphi">both</a> <a href="#praktikos">practical</a> and <a href="#telete">ritual</a> contexts. Traditionally carved from alabaster, though the more modern, glass-blown sort is eminently suitable for <i><a href="#nektar">néktar</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹alabastron›, ‹alabastrum›; related to the cognate of ‹alabaster›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="alazon"><i>alazṓn<br/>alazônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alazon. Literally, “alazon”. Still more literally, “boaster” or “braggart”. A stock character in <i><a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a> </i>embodying arrogance, bluster, and pretension. These flaws cause him to be outwitted by the <i><a href="#eiron">eírōn</a>. </i>Common archetypes include the angry <a href="#pater">father</a> and bragging <a href="#hoplites">soldier</a>. For example: <i>‹Euthýphrōn›, </i>‹Macbeth›, ‹Tom Buchanan›. Cognate of ‹alazon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aletheia"><i>alḗtheia<br/>alḗtheiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alethic. Literally, “alethic”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#lethe">lḗthē</a>. </i>Still more literally, “not concealed” or “not forgotten”, hence truth or reality. Curiously, the implication is that truth is not <a href="#heurisko">discovered</a>, merely <a href="#anamnesis">remembered</a>. Cognate of ‹alethic›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#pseudos">pseûdos</a>, <a href="#kryptos">kryptós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="alexikakon"><i>alexíkakon<br/>alexíkaka</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alexicacus. Literally, “alexicacus”, combining <i>aléxō, kakón. </i>Still more literally, “averter of evil”. A warding field, oft sustained by <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹alexikakos›, ‹alexicacus›; related to the cognates of ‹alexipharmic›, ‹Alexander›, ‹cacophony›, ‹cacodemon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="alouminio"><i>aloumínio<br/>aloumínia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aluminum. Literally, “aluminum”. Still more literally, “alum metal”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Remembered now only as mithril, its isolation from ores requires the awesome power of caged <i><a href="#keraunos">keraunós</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹aluminum›; related to the cognate of ‹alum›. See also: <i><a href="#metallon">métallon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="alpha"><i>álpha</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alpha. Literally, “alpha”. This <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a>, </i><a href="#morphe">shaped</a> like an alpha, is the <a href="#protos">first</a> in the <i><a href="#alphabetos">álphabētos</a>; </i>hence, it denotes the beginning. Should this not, therefore, be the <a href="#protos">first</a> entry in the glossary? Associated with the <i><a href="#stigma">stígma</a> </i>of <i><a href="#apeleutheros">apeleútheros</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹alpha›; related to the cognate of ‹a›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#omega">ô méga</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="alphabetos"><i>álphabētos<br/>álphabētoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alphabet. Literally, “alphabet”. Still more literally, derived from the <a href="#protos">first</a> <a href="#dyo">two</a> <i><a href="#gramma">grámmata</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹alphabet›; related to the cognates of ‹abecedary›, ‹abecedarium›. See also: <i><a href="#alpha">álpha</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ambrosia"><i>ambrosía<br/>ambrosíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ambrosia. Literally, “ambrosia”, combining <i><a href="#a">án</a>, brotós. </i>Still more literally, “without mortality”, hence <a href="#athanatos">immortality</a>. A formal term for <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>, </i>as distinct from <i><a href="#nektar">néktar</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ambrosia›; related to the cognates of ‹mortal›, ‹murder›, ‹Ambrose›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="amphi"><i>amphí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Amphi‑. Literally “amphi‑”. Still more literally, “around”, “on both sides”, “about”, “near”. Cognate of ‹amphi‑›, ‹amph‑›; related to the cognates of ‹amphibious›, ‹amphitheater›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="amphidromia"><i>amphidromía<br/>amphidromíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Amphidromia. Literally, “amphidromia”, combining <i><a href="#amphi">amphí</a>, drómos</i>. Still more literally, “running around”. Even more literally, “both-sides racing”, referring to the <a href="#telete">ceremonial</a> <a href="#phoros">carrying</a> of the infant around and around the hearth as a <i><a href="#katharmos">kátharmos</a>. </i>The <a href="#telete">ritual</a> of <a href="#onoma">naming</a> a <a href="#gonos">newborn</a> on its tenth <a href="#hemera">day</a>; a <a href="#oikos">family</a> <i><a href="#heorte">heortḗ</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹amphidromia›; related to the cognates of ‹amphidromic›, ‹amphidromous›, ‹dromos›, ‹dromedary›, ‹hippodrome›. See also: <i><a href="#dekate">dekátē</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="amphilyke"><i>amphilýkē<br/>amphilýkai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “twilight”, combining <i><a href="#amphi">amphí</a>, lýkē. </i>Still more literally, “around (dawn) light”. No relation to wolves, despite its relation to the wolf-light of <i>lykóphōs.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="amphoreus"><i>amphoreús<br/>amphoreîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Amphora. Literally, “amphora”,
combining <i><a href="#amphi">amphí</a>, <a href="#phoros">phóros</a>. </i>Still more literally, “carried on both sides”. Two-handled <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>jar used for storing and transporting liquids like <a href="#oinos">wine</a> or <a href="#elaion0">olive oil</a>; typically small to medium-sized, although <a href="#tis">some</a> are <a href="#megas">larger</a> still. Distinguished by its narrow cylindrical neck, oval <a href="#soma">body</a>, and tapered bottom. More modern, glass versions exist, though I myself am not fond of them. Cognate of ‹amphora›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#pithos">píthos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ana"><i>aná</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ana‑. Literally, “ana‑”. Still more literally, “up”, “back”, “again”, “throughout”, “each”. No relation to ‹ana›, ‹‑ana›, ‹Anna›, <i><a href="#a">án</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ana‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anabaino"><i>anabaínō<br/>anabaínomen</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Anabasis. Literally, “anabasis”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, baínō. </i>Still more literally, “ascend”. Even more literally, “go up”. When capitalized, refers to Ascension to <a href="#theos">godhood</a>. Cognate of ‹anabasis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anagnorisis"><i>anagnṓrisis<br/>anagnōríseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Anagnorisis. Literally, “anagnorisis”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, <a href="#gnorisis">gnṓrisis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “knowing again”, hence recognition. Oft the most <a href="#drama">dramatic</a> moment in a <i><a href="#tragoidia">tragōidía</a>, </i>when the <a href="#tragoidia">tragic</a> figure arrives at a <a href="#bios">life</a>-<a href="#meta">changing</a> <a href="#synesis">insight</a> into their circumstances. For example, suddenly <a href="#anagnorisis">realizing</a> precisely why your <a href="#gyne">wife</a> reminds you so much of your <a href="#meter">mother</a>. Cognate of ‹anagnorisis›; related to the cognates of ‹diagnosis›, ‹gnostic›, ‹agnostic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anamnesis"><i>anámnēsis<br/>anamnḗseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Anamnesis. Literally, “anamnesis”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, <a href="#mneme">mnḗmē</a>. </i>Still more literally, “remember again”, hence reminiscence. Cognate of ‹anamnesis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anastasis"><i>anástasis<br/>anastáseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Anastasis. Literally, “anastasis”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, <a href="#stasis">stásis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “rising up” or “standing again”, hence resurrection. The aspect of <i><a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>, </i>now forbidden, concerned with <a href="#iatrike">healing</a> the sick and injured, and even raising the <a href="#nekros">dead</a>. Works by transferring <a href="#zoe">life</a> from <i><a href="#doretes">dōrētḗs</a> </i>to <i><a href="#dektes">déktēs</a>, </i>sometimes even voluntarily. Cognate of ‹anastasis›; related to the cognates of ‹anastatic›, ‹Anastasia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anathermaer"><i>anathermāḗr<br/>anathermāéres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “rising hot air”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, <a href="#therme">thérmē</a>, <a href="#aer">aḗr</a>. </i>A thermal or other warm updraft, <a href="#dynamis">powered</a> by the <a href="#therme">heat</a> of the <a href="#helios">Sun</a>. If only such a gas could somehow be used to allow flight without the flapping of wings for lift.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anazopyrounkaryon"><i>anazōpyroûn káryon<br/>anazōpyroûnta kárya</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “rekindling nuts”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, <a href="#zoe">zōḗ</a>, <a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>, <a href="#karyon">kárya</a>. </i>Any of the tropical nuts or seeds that, when brewed, yield a stimulating beverage, hence an <i><a href="#egeiron">egeírōn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="adrapodon"><i>andrápodon<br/>andrápoda</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “man-footed”, combining <i><a href="#aner">anḗr</a>, <a href="#pous">poús</a>. </i>A common, dehumanizing slur for <i><a href="#doulos">doûloi</a>, </i>particularly <a href="#arsenikos">male</a> captives, implying that they are chattel who differ from other <a href="#ther">beasts</a> of burden only in that they walk on <a href="#dyo">two</a> <a href="#pous">feet</a>. See also: <i><a href="#anthroposomatheros">ánthrōposôma thērós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="androgynon"><i>andrógynon<br/>andrógyna</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Androgynous. Literally, “androgynous”, combining <i><a href="#aner">anḗr</a>, <a href="#gyne">gynḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “man/woman”. Quite literally, the combination of male and female, whether androgynous, bisexual, intersex, or <i><a href="#hermaphroditon">hermaphróditon</a>. </i>The connotation is social and religious: behavioral, not necessarily biological. Cognate of ‹androgynous›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#arsenothely">arsenóthēly</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="andron"><i>andrṓn<br/>andrônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “male place”, referencing <i><a href="#aner">anḗr</a>. </i>In a proper house, it is the area at the front, specifically designated for use by men and their guests: the man cave. Though, if no men are present, the women of the household may visit briefly, such as to tidy up. Female servants and entertainers are always permitted, including <i><a href="#oiketes">oikétai</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#porne">pórnai</a>. </i>Beautifully decorated with a tiled floor and comfortable furnishing, it is the setting for any <i><a href="#symposion">sympósion</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#gynaikeion">gynaikeîon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="andronymikon"><i>andrōnymikón<br/>andrōnymiká</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “man’s name” or “husband’s name”, combining <i><a href="#aner">anḗr</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>The possessive <a href="#morphe">form</a> of the husband’s name, used as part of the full name in place of the <i><a href="#patronymikos">patrōnymikós</a>, </i>for your <a href="#gyne">wife</a> is as much your property as your <a href="#pais">children</a> or <a href="#doulos">slaves</a> are. See also: <a href="#people">people</a>, <i><a href="#despotonymon">despotṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aner"><i>anḗr<br/>ándres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Andro‑. Literally, “andro‑”. Still more literally, “man” or “husband”. Like <i><a href="#gyne">gynḗ</a>, </i>only superior, due to being <i><a href="#arsenikos">arsenikós</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹andro‑›, ‹andr‑›; related to the cognates of ‹android›, ‹Andrew›, ‹André›, ‹André the Giant›. See also: <i><a href="#andron">andrṓn</a>, <a href="#adrapodon">andrápodon</a>, <a href="#andronymikon">andrōnymikón</a>, <a href="#androgynon">andrógynon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="angelos"><i>ángelos<br/>ángeloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Angel. Literally, “angel”. Still more literally, “messenger”. In addition to mundane couriers, may refer to <i><a href="#hemitheos">hēmítheoi</a> </i>or to certain birds, such as the <i><a href="#hierax">hiérax</a> </i>and <i><a href="#korax">kórax</a>, </i>in their <a href="#prosopon">roles</a> as the <a href="#lampros">glorious</a> messengers of the <a href="#theos">gods</a>. Cognate of ‹angel›; related to the cognates of ‹Angel›, ‹Angela›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anoteros"><i>anṓteros<br/>anṓteroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “higher”, combining <i><a href="#ana">aná</a>, ‑teros. </i>Specifically, above or superior to in rank, altitude, or status. Related to the cognate of ‹anode›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anthropophagos"><i>anthrōpophágos<br/>anthrōpophágoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “man-eater”, combining <i><a href="#anthropos">ánthrōpos</a>, <a href="#phagos">phagós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anthropos"><i>ánthrōpos<br/>ánthrōpoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Anthropo‑. Literally, “anthropo‑”. Still more literally, “human being” or “person”. The broadest of categories, including even <a href="#gyne">women</a>, <a href="#pais">children</a>, and <a href="#doulos">slaves</a>. No relation to ‹Claude›. Cognate of ‹anthropo‑›, ‹anthropic›; related to the cognates of ‹anthropology›, ‹anthropomorphic›, ‹philanthropy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#hemitheos">hēmítheos</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#daimon">daímōn</a>. </i>See also: <a href="#people">people</a>, <i><a href="#anthroposomatheros">ánthrōposôma thērós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anthroposomatheros"><i>ánthrōposôma thērós<br/>ánthrōposṓmata thērôn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “man-bodied animal”, combining <i><a href="#anthropos">ánthrōpos</a>, <a href="#soma">sôma</a>, <a href="#ther">thḗr</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#therokephalos">thēroképhalos</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#adrapodon">andrápodon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anti"><i>antí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Anti‑. Literally, “anti‑”. Still more literally, “against”, “opposite”, “in place of”, “instead of”. Cognate of ‹anti‑›, ‹anti›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="antichthon"><i>Antíchthōn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Antichthon. Literally, “antichthon”, combining <i><a href="#anti">antí</a>, <a href="#chthonios">chthónios</a>. </i>Still more literally “counter-Earth”. The <a href="#counterearth">Counter-Earth</a> on the opposite side of <i><a href="#helios">Hḗlios</a> </i>from <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, </i>sharing an orbit yet forever obscured. Cognate of ‹antichthon›. See also: <i><a href="#antichthonious">Antichthṓnios</a>, <a href="#antipous">antípous</a>, <a href="#selenaion">Selēnaîon</a>. </i>Contrast with: <a href="#earth">Earth</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="antichthonious"><i>Antichthṓnios<br/>Antichthṓnioi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>The wretched, <a href="#anthropos">human</a>-like inhabitants of <i><a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a>. </i>See: <i><a href="#antipous">antípous</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="antidoton"><i>antídoton<br/>antídota</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Antidote. Literally, “antidote”, combining <i><a href="#anti">antí</a>, <a href="#doretes">dōrētḗs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “given against”. Although I suppose it could also be interpreted as “against gifter”. Cognate of ‹antidote›. See also: <i><a href="#poton">potón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="antiheliokinetikos"><i>antiheliokinētikós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “moving against the sun”, combining <i><a href="#anti">antí</a>, <a href="#heliokinetikos">heliokinētikós</a>, </i>hence counterclockwise.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="antipous"><i>antípous<br/>antípodes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Antipode. Literally, “antipode”, combining <i><a href="#anti">antí</a>, <a href="#pous">poús</a>. </i>Still more literally, “against foot”. Refers to the idea of <a href="#anthropos">people</a> standing upside down by having their <a href="#pous">feet</a> against our own, hence a <a href="#anthropos">person</a> or place on the opposite side. In modern usage, refers to <i><a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a>, </i>not the traditional, <a href="#hamartia">mistaken</a> <a href="#synesis">understanding</a> of the <a href="#earth">Earth</a> as a flat disc occupied on <a href="#amphi">both</a> sides, much less <a href="#pas">all</a> the nonsense about elephants on a <a href="#pontos">sea</a> turtle. See: <i><a href="#antichthonious">Antichthṓnios</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="anypodetos"><i>anypódētos<br/>anypódētoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “barefoot”, combining <i><a href="#a">án</a>, <a href="#hypo">hypó</a>, <a href="#desmos">desmós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “not bound under”. No relation to ‹any›, <i><a href="#pous">pódes</a>. </i>A suitable state for a <a href="#gyne">woman</a> indoors, which is where they belong.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="apatao"><i>apatáō<br/>apatái</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “deceive”, “mislead”, or “fool”. Oft involves <a href="#apatao">lies</a>, yet does not require them. See also: <i><a href="#dolios">dólios</a>, <a href="#apatao">pseûdos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="apeleutheros"><i>apeleútheros<br/>apeleútheroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “free again”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, <a href="#eleutheros">eleútheros</a>, </i>hence <a href="#apeleutheros">freedman</a>. A former <i><a href="#doulos">doûlos</a> </i>who was freed through the process of manumission, hence a <i><a href="#metoikos">métoikos</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#eleutheros">eleútheros</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#alpha">álpha</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aphairesis"><i>aphaíresis<br/>aphaíreseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Apheresis. Literally, “apheresis”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, hairéō. </i>Still more literally, “taking away”. Cognate of ‹apheresis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aphedron"><i>aphedrōn<br/>aphedrônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sitting place away from”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, <a href="#hedra">hédra</a>, </i>hence latrine, toilet, or privy. A social space for casual conversation, unhindered by considerations for privacy.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aphonos"><i>áphōnos<br/>áphōnoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aphonic. Literally, “aphonic”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#phone">phōnḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “without voice”, hence mute or silent. Cognate of ‹aphonic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aphorismos"><i>aphorismós<br/>aphorismoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aphorism. Literally, “aphorism”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, horízō. </i>Still more literally, “setting apart”, hence defining. A brief, oft witty, statement of <a href="#aletheia">truth</a> that distills an idea, separating it from broader <a href="#ennoia">concepts</a>. Cognate of ‹aphorism›; related to the cognate of ‹horizon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aphron"><i>áphrōn<br/>áphrones</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fool”. Still more literally, “without sense”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, phrēn. </i>Specifically, <a href="#tis">one</a> who, <a href="#peinaleos">lacking</a> prudence, fails to look ahead. Related to the cognates of ‹phrenetic›, ‹phrenology›, ‹schizophrenic›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#euethes">euḗthēs</a>, <a href="#moron">mōrós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="apo"><i>apó</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Apo‑. Literally, “apo‑”. Still more literally, “from”, “away”, “off”, “detached”. Cognate of ‹apo‑›, ‹ap‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="apodesmos"><i>apódesmos<br/>apódesmoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “band that ties off”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, <a href="#desmos">desmós</a>. </i>Typically refers to a <i><a href="#strophion">stróphion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="apokalypsis"><i>apokálypsis<br/>apokalýpseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Apocalypse. Literally, “apocalypse”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, <a href="#kryptos">kryptós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “uncovering”, hence revelation. Cognate of ‹apocalypse›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="apoptygma"><i>apóptygma<br/>apoptýgmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “folded back”, combining <i><a href="#apo">apó</a>, ptýssō. </i>The overfold of a <i><a href="#peplos">péplos</a>, </i>or sometimes a <a href="#gyne">woman</a>’s <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a>, </i><a href="#poiesis">creating</a> a cuff at the neck and a <a href="#dyo">second</a> layer that drapes down to the waist. It is <a href="#amphi">both</a> decorative and <a href="#praktikos">practical</a>, allowing the length to be adjusted while providing warmth and modesty. No relation to ‹berzerk›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="appellation"><i>appellation</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>For a <a href="#theos">god</a>, Their primary <i><a href="#prosonymia">prosonymía</a>: </i>the nickname used to avoid the <i><a href="#blasphemia">blasphēmía</a> </i>of <a href="#phone">speaking</a> <a href="#phone">aloud</a> Their <i><a href="#etymonymon">Etymṓnymon</a>. </i>For example: <i><a href="#dolios">Dólios</a>, <a href="#doterion">Dōtḗrion</a>, <a href="#ekdikousa">Ekdikoúsa</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="archaicsmile"><i>archaic smile</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A slight, tight-lipped smile, showing <a href="#eu">good</a> humor without laughter. Featured on statuary such as <i><a href="#kouros">koûros</a>, <a href="#agalma">ágalma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="archaiologia"><i>archaiología<br/>archaiologíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Archaeology. Literally, “archaeology”, combining <i><a href="#arche">archḗ</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “archaic study”. Cognate of ‹archaeology›, ‹archeology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="arche"><i>archḗ<br/>archaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Arch‑. Literally, “arch‑”. Still more literally, “beginning”, “first”, “leading”, “rule”, or “realm”. No relation to ‹arch› in the architectural sense. Cognate of ‹arch‑›, ‹archi‑›, ‹-arch›; related to the cognates of ‹archaic›, ‹architect›, ‹archangel›, ‹anarchy›. See also: <i><a href="#archaiologia">archaiología</a>, <a href="#archiereia">archiéreia</a>, <a href="#archiereus">archiereús</a>, <a href="#archon">árchōn</a>, <a href="#hierarchia">hierarchía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="archiereia"><i>archiéreia<br/>archiéreiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>High priestess, akin to <i><a href="#archiereus">archiereús</a>. </i>The term is included here primarily for <a href="#pas">completeness</a>, as it is rarely used — for <a href="#gyne">women</a> are obviously not fit to lead <a href="#aner">men</a>. See also: <a href="#priesthood">priesthood</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="archiereus"><i>archiereús<br/>archiereîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>
Literally, “first holy”, combining <i><a href="#arche">archḗ</a>, <a href="#hiereus">hiereús</a>. </i>Specifically, the <a href="#hieros">holy</a> leader or <a href="#akros">high</a> priest. See also: <a href="#priesthood">priesthood</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="archon"><i>árchōn<br/>árchontes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Archon. Literally, “archon”. Still more literally, “ruler”, referencing <i><a href="#arche">archḗ</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#arkanon">árkanon.</a> </i>Cognate of ‹archon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="argon"><i>árgon<br/>árga</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Argon. Literally, “argon”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, érgon. </i>Still more literally, “not working”, hence “inactive”. Cognate of ‹argon›; related to the cognate of ‹ergonomics›. See also: <i><a href="#atmos">atmós</a></i>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="argyros"><i>árgyros<br/>árgyroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Argentum. Literally, “argentum”, hence silver. Still more literally, “shining”, “bright”, or “white”. Cognate of ‹argentum›; related to the cognate of ‹Argentina›. See also: <i><a href="#metallon">métallon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aristokratia"><i>aristokratía<br/>aristokratíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aristocracy. Literally, “aristocracy”, combining <i><a href="#aristos">áristos</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “best rule”. Ideal, if only we could determine who was <a href="#aristos">best</a>. Cognate of ‹aristocracy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aristos"><i>áristos<br/>áristoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aristo‑. Literally, “aristo‑”. Still more literally, “best”. No relation to nanotechnology. Cognate of ‹aristo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹aristonym›, ‹aristophilia›, ‹aristology›. See also: <i><a href="#aristokratia">aristokratía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="arithmetike"><i>arithmētikḗ<br/>arithmētikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Arithmetic. Literally, “arithmetic”, combining <i>arithmós, ‑ētikós. </i>Still more literally, “study of numbers”. Cognate of ‹arithmetic›. See also: <a href="#fournumeracies">four numeracies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="arkanon"><i>árkanon<br/>árkana</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Arcana. Literally, “arcana”. Still more literally, “kept secret”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. A secret, mysterious, or <a href="#kryptos">hidden</a> thing, implying <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a> </i>with the connotation of formal study. No relation to <i><a href="#archon">árchōn</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹arcana›, ‹arcane›, ‹arcanum›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="arsenikos"><i>arsenikós<br/>arsenikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “male” or “masculine”, referencing <i>ársēn. </i>The defining attribute of <i><a href="#aner">anḗr</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#kouros">koûros</a>. </i>Sadly, no relation to ‹arson›. Related to the cognate of ‹arsenic›, though only through error. Contrast with: <i><a href="#theleia">thḗleia</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#arsenothely">arsenóthēly</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="arsenothely"><i>arsenóthēly<br/>arsenóthēla</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “male/female”, combining <i><a href="#arsenikos">arsenikós</a>, <a href="#theleia">thḗleia</a>, </i>hence <i><a href="#hermaphroditon">hermaphróditon</a>. </i>The connotation is biological and physiological, not social. Contrast with: <i><a href="#androgynon">andrógynon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aspect"><i>aspect</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>For a <a href="#theos">god</a>, an <a href="#opsis">appearance</a> They are <a href="#gnosis">known</a> to wear when manifesting Themselves to <a href="#thnetos">mortals</a>. Like so <a href="#poly">many</a> things, can be used as an <i><a href="#epiklesis">epiklḗsis</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#polymorphia">polymorphía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aspis"><i>aspís<br/>aspídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aspis. Literally, “aspis”. Still more literally, “shield”. A moderately <a href="#megas">large</a>, round shield that is strapped to the arm and gripped securely at the edge, rather than at a central boss, allowing it to be supported comfortably on the shoulder. Much <a href="#megas">larger</a> than a <i>péltē </i>and <a href="#tis">somewhat</a> smaller than a <i>thureós, </i>its face is emblazoned with bold, frightening <a href="#phantasia">images</a> — or if you’re a dullard, just <a href="#tis">some</a> <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a>. </i>Used with <a href="#amphi">both</a> <i><a href="#dory">dóry</a> </i>and <i><a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>, </i>it is an essential part of the <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a> </i>of the <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>. </i>Only a <a href="#moron">fool</a> goes into <a href="#machetes">battle</a> without <a href="#heis">one</a>, and such a <a href="#moron">fool</a> deserves to <a href="#thanatos">die</a>. See also: <i><a href="#hoplon">hóplon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹aspis›; related to the cognates of ‹Aspis›, ‹aspid‑›, ‹‑aspis›, ‹asp›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#aigis">aigís</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aster"><i>astḗr<br/>Ástra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “star”. No relation to <i>‹Astártē›, <a href="#astragalos">astrágalos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹star›; related to the cognates of ‹astronomy›, ‹asterisk›, ‹stellar›, ‹Stella›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="asteroeides"><i>asteroeidḗs<br/>Asteroeideîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Asteroid. Literally, “asteroid”. Still more literally, “star-like”, combining <i><a href="#aster">astḗr</a>, ‑oeidḗs. </i>A <a href="#failedwanderer">Failed Wanderer</a>. Cognate of ‹asteroid›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astragalomanteia"><i>astragalomanteía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astragalomancy. Literally “astragalomancy”, combining <i><a href="#astragalos">astrágalos</a>, <a href="#manteia">manteía</a>. </i>Still, more literally, “astragalus divination”. Considered perhaps less precise than <i><a href="#hepatoskopia">hēpatoskopía</a>, </i>though at least it is not as messy. Cognate of ‹astragalomancy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astragalos"><i>astrágalos<br/>astrágaloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astragalus. Literally, “astragalus”. Still more literally, “joint”. The knucklebone of a sheep or <a href="#aix">goat</a>, <a href="#tettares">four</a>-<a href="#hedra">sided</a> and used as a die. Adults roll a quartet of these as ‹4d4› dice in <a href="#agon">games</a> of chance, <a href="#pais">children</a> throw them up in the <a href="#aer">air</a> and attempt to catch them on the back of the hand, and <a href="#hiereus">priests</a> use them for <a href="#manteia">divination</a> through <i><a href="#astragalomanteia">astragalomanteía</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#aster">astḗr</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹astragalus›, ‹astragal›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astrologia"><i>astrología<br/>astrologíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astrology. Literally, “astrology”, combining <i><a href="#aster">astḗr</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “star study”. The mystical study of the stars and other heavenly <a href="#soma">bodies</a>, seeking an <a href="#synesis">understanding</a> of their influence upon <a href="#anthropos">human</a> affairs and <a href="#physikon">natural</a> events; it is a <a href="#morphe">form</a> of <i><a href="#astromanteia">astromanteía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹astrology›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astromanteia"><i>astromanteía<br/>astromanteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astromancy. Literally, “astromancy”, combining <i><a href="#aster">astḗr</a>, <a href="#manteia">manteía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “star divination”. The mystical study of the stars and other heavenly <a href="#soma">bodies</a>, using them to prophecize: <i><a href="#astrologia">astrología</a> </i>is <a href="#heis">one</a> example. Cognate of ‹astromancy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astrometrikos"><i>astrometrikós<br/> astrometrikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astrometry. Literally, “astrometry”, combining <i><a href="#aster">astḗr</a>, <a href="#metrikos">metrikós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “star measurement”. The branch of <i><a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a> </i>concerned with the measurement of the stars and other heavenly <a href="#soma">bodies</a>, mapping out their locations <a href="#epi">over</a> time. Cognate of ‹astrometry›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astronomia"><i>astronomía<br/>astronomíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astronomy. Literally, “astronomy”, combining <i><a href="#aster">astḗr</a>, <a href="#nomike">nomikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “law of the stars”. The <a href="#episteme">scientific</a> study of the stars and other heavenly <a href="#soma">bodies</a>, with an emphasis on <i><a href="#astrometrikos">astrometrikós</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹astronomy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#astromanteia">astromanteía</a>, <a href="#astrologia">astrología</a>. </i>See also: <a href="#fournumeracies">four numeracies</a>, <i><a href="#astronomos">astronómos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="astronomos"><i>astronómos<br/>astronómoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Astronomer. Literally, “astronomer”, referencing <i><a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹astronomer›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="asylon"><i>ásylon<br/>ásyla</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Asylum. Literally, “asylum”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, sŷlon. </i>Still more literally, “without seizure”. A place of safety: a sanctuary. No relation to ‹Cylon›. Cognate of ‹asylum›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="asymmetria"><i>asymmetría<br/>asymmetríai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Asymmetry. Literally, “asymmetry”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#syn">sýn</a>, <a href="#metrikos">metrikós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “not measured together”. Cognate of ‹asymmetry›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="asymptotos"><i>asýmptōtos<br/>asýmptōtoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Asymptote. Literally, “asymptote”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#syn">sýn</a>, píptō, ‑tos. </i>Still more literally, “not coinciding”. A line that approaches without ever touching. Cognate of ‹asymptote›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="athanatos"><i>athánatos<br/>athánatoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “immortal”, combining <i><a href="#a">á</a>, <a href="#thanatos">thánatos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “undying”. Contrast with <i><a href="#thnetos">thnētós</a>, <a href="#nekrozoos">nekrozṓōs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="athletes"><i>athlētḗs<br/>athlētaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Athlete. Literally, “athlete”. Still more literally, “contestant” or “prize-struggler”. Cognate of ‹athlete›; related to the cognate of ‹decathlon›. See also: <i><a href="#agon">agṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="atlantis"><i>Atlantìs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Atlantis. Literally, “Atlantis”, referencing <i><a href="#atlas">Átlas</a> </i>as His <i><a href="#eponymos">epṓnymos</a>. </i>A mythical island <a href="#olethros">destroyed</a> by the <a href="#theos">gods</a> as <a href="#dike">punishment</a> for hubris. Cognate of ‹Atlantis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="atlas"><i>Átlas<br/>átlantes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Atlas. Literally, “Atlas”, referencing <i>tlênai. </i>Still more literally, “endurer”. <a href="#appellation">Appellation</a> of the <a href="#nekros">faded</a> <a href="#protos">first</a>-<a href="#gonos">generation</a> <i><a href="#titan">Titán</a> </i>who had, <a href="#heis">one</a> way or another, kept the <a href="#ouranoi">Sky</a> from falling. Odd, though, that it hasn’t fallen in His absence. Cognate of ‹Atlas›, related to the cognates of ‹atlas›, ‹atlantes›, ‹Atlantic›, ‹Atlantis›. See also: <i><a href="#atlantis">Atlantìs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="atmos"><i>atmós<br/>atmoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Atmos‑. Literally, “atmos‑”. Still more literally, “steam”, “vapor”, “mist”, or “smoke”, hence any gas. Cognate of ‹atmos‑›, ‹atmo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹atmometer›, ‹atmology›. See also: 
<i><a href="#atmosphaira">atmosphaîra</a>, <a href="#aer">aḗr</a>, <a href="#argon">árgon</a>, <a href="#nitrogenes">nitrogenḗs</a>, <a href="#aiolopyle">aiolopýlē</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="atmosphaira"><i>atmosphaîra<br/>atmosphaîrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Atmosphere. Literally, “atmosphere”, combining <i><a href="#atmos">atmós</a>, <a href="#sphaira">sphaîra</a>. </i>Still more literally, “gas sphere”.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="auge"><i>augḗ<br/>augái</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “radiance” or “glare”. Still more literally, “ray of light” or “gleam”. Refers oft to the <a href="#phos">light</a> of the <a href="#helios">Sun</a>, <a href="#heos">dawn</a>, or <a href="#theos">divinity</a>, though also to ordinary <a href="#phlox">flames</a>. Though are <a href="#phlox">flames</a> ever <a href="#aletheia">truly</a> ordinary? I think not. Distantly related to the cognates of ‹awe›, ‹aurora›, ‹augment›, ‹august›, ‹augury›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#derxis">dérxis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aule"><i>aulḗ<br/>aulái</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aula. Literally, “aula”. Still more literally, “courtyard”, “enclosure”, or “court”. Cognate of ‹aula›, ‹aul‑›, ‹aulo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹aulic›, ‹aularian›, ‹auloi›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="aura"><i>áura<br/>aûrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aura. Literally, “aura”. Still more literally, “wind” or “glow”. The <a href="#metaphysikon">supernatural</a> energy field — consisting of <i><a href="#pneuma">pneûma</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#psyche">psychḗ</a>; </i>and emanating from <a href="#zoe">living</a> and recently-<a href="#thanatos">deceased</a> <a href="#anthropos">people</a> — which <a href="#apokalypsis">reveals</a> their spiritual and <a href="#nous">mental</a> state to the piercing gaze of my <a href="#treis">third</a> <a href="#ophthalmos">eye</a>. Cognate of ‹aura›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="autokratia"><i>autokratía<br/>autokratíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Autocracy. Literally, “autocracy”, combining <i><a href="#autos">autó</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “rule by oneself”, referring to governance by a <a href="#monos">single</a> <a href="#prosopon">individual</a> with supreme <a href="#kratos">authority</a>. Cognate of ‹autocracy›. See also: <i><a href="#autokratoria">autokratoría</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="autokratoria"><i>autokratoría<br/>autokratoríai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “empire”, referencing <i><a href="#autokratia">autokratía</a>. </i>An absolute dominion, governed by an autocrat or autocratic <a href="#soma">body</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="automaton"><i>autómaton<br/>autómata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Automaton. Literally, “automaton”, referencing <i><a href="#autos">autó</a>. </i>Still more literally, “(operating) of one’s own accord”. A <a href="#nous">mindless</a> thing that nonetheless acts. Cognate of ‹automaton›; related to the cognate of ‹automatic›, ‹automat›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="autos"><i>autós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Auto‑. Literally, “auto‑”. Still more literally, “self”, “itself”, “the same”. Cognate of ‹auto‑›. See also: <i><a href="#autokratia">autokratía</a>, <a href="#automaton">autómaton</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="baklavas"><i>baklavás<br/>baklavádes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Baklava. Literally, “baklava”. Still more literally, “piled up”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. The heavenly pastry, <a href="#poiesis">made</a> from thin layers of <i><a href="#phyllopemma">phyllópemma</a>, </i>stuffed with spiced nuts and soaked in <a href="#chrysos">golden</a> <a href="#meli">honey</a> sauce. Superior to other <a href="#meli">honey</a> cakes, such as the <i><a href="#meli">melitóeis</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> plakoûs. </i>I have a <a href="#prosopon">personal</a> recipe for this dish that you absolutely must try! Cognate of ‹baklava›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="barbaros"><i>bárbaros<br/>bárbaroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Barbarian. Literally, “barbarian”. Still more literally, through onomatopoeia, “bar-bar” — the incomprehensible <a href="#phone">sound</a> that <a href="#xenos">foreigners</a> make when they spout their inferior <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> <a href="#glossa">languages</a> at us. Denotes an uncivilized outlander incapable of <a href="#phone">speaking</a> <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a> </i>natively. Cognate of ‹barbarian›; related to the cognate of ‹rhubarb›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="basileiaientoisouranois"><i>basileîai en toîs Ouranoîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “kingdoms in the Heavens”, combining <i><a href="#basileus">basileús</a>, <a href="#en">én</a>, <a href="#tei">têi</a>, <a href="#ouranoi">Ouranoí</a>. <a href="#epitheton">Epítheton</a> </i>for <i><a href="#ouraniodoryphoron">Ouraniodoryphóra</a>, </i>where the <a href="#abode">abodes</a> of the <a href="#theos">gods</a> may be found.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="basileus"><i>basileús<br/>basileîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Basileus. Literally, “basileus”. Still more literally, “king”. No relation to ‹basilar›. Cognate of ‹basileus›; related to the cognates of ‹basilica›, ‹basil›. See also: <i><a href="#hierobasileus">hierobasileús</a>, <a href="#basileiaientoisouranois">basileîai en toîs Ouranoîs</a>, <a href="#thronos">thrónos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="bios"><i>bíos<br/>bíoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Bio‑. Literally, “bio‑”. Still more literally, “life”. Specifically, as experience, a way of living, or lifespan. No relation to ‹BIOS›. Cognate of ‹bio›, ‹bio‑›; related to the cognates of ‹biology›, ‹biography›, ‹abiotic›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#zoe">zōḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="birrhos"><i>bírrhos<br/>bírrhoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Birrus. Literally, “birrus”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. A heavy woolen <i><a href="#himation">himátion</a>, </i>sometimes coated with <a href="#melikeron">beeswax</a> or <a href="#ther">animal</a> fat to proof against wetness. Cognate of ‹birrus›, ‹byrrus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="blasphemia"><i>blasphēmía<br/>blasphēmíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Blasphemy. Literally, “blasphemy”, combining <i>bláptō, phḗmē. </i>Still more literally, “harmful speech”. The irreverent crime of using a <a href="#theos">god’s</a> <a href="#name">Name</a> in vain: outside of <a href="#euche">prayer</a>, and especially in anger. Cognate of ‹blasphemy›; related to the cognates of ‹ablation›, ‹prophet›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="bomolochos"><i>bōmolóchos<br/>bōmolóchoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Bomolochus. Literally, “bomolochus”, combining <i><a href="#bomos">bōmós</a>, lóchos. </i>Still more literally, “altar lurker”, referencing the notion of lurking by the <i><a href="#bomos">bōmós</a>, </i>uninvited, in hopes of irreverently snatching offerings for themselves. A stock character in <i><a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a>, </i>this crude if witty buffoon oft breaks the fourth wall — clearly the polar opposite to how I behave, don’t you agree? For example, <i>‹Strepsiádēs›, </i>‹Sir John Falstaff›, ‹Randle P. McMurphy›. Cognate of ‹bomolochus›, <a href="#amphi">both</a> the parasitic stock character and the parasitic crustacean.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="bomos"><i>bōmós<br/>bōmoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “altar”. Still more literally, “raised platform”, referencing <i>baínō. </i>An ornate stove for <a href="#kaio">burnt</a> <a href="#thysia">sacrifices</a>, inscribed always with the <i><a href="#eikon">Eikṓn</a>, </i>and never taller than the <i><a href="#agalma">ágalma</a>. </i>Besides their use for <i><a href="#thysia">thysíai</a>, </i>they mark an <i><a href="#asylon">ásylon</a>: </i>a <a href="#asylon">sanctuary</a> within which <a href="#tis">any</a> violence is considered an affront to the <a href="#theos">god</a>, and where solemn oaths, whether <i><a href="#horkos">hórkoi</a> </i>or <i><a href="#epangelian">epangelíai</a>, </i>are taken.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="bous"><i>boûs<br/>boés</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “ox”, “bull”, or “cow”. Related to the cognates of ‹bovine›, ‹bucolic›, ‹beef›, ‹butter›. See also: <i><a href="#boustrophedon">boustrophēdón</a>, <a href="#ouraniobos">Ouraníobos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="boustrophedon"><i>boustrophēdón</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Boustrophedon. Literally, “boustrophedon”, combining <i><a href="#bous">boûs</a>, strophḗ. </i>Still more literally, “ox turning”. Text <a href="#writing">written</a> as the <a href="#bous">ox</a> plows: <a href="#protos">first</a> <a href="#epitadexia">left to right</a>, then <a href="#epitalaia">right to left</a>, alternating thereafter. In reversed lines, the <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a> </i>themselves are backward, as though seen in an <i><a href="#esoptron">ésoptron</a>. </i>Typical of classical writing. Cognate of ‹boustrophedon›; related to the cognate of ‹apostrophe›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="byssos"><i>býssos<br/>býssoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Byssus. Literally, “byssus”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. A fine, yellowish-white linen prized for its exceptional delicacy and sheen. It is lightweight, almost sheer, and has a <a href="#physikon">natural</a> gloss: akin to silk though not slippery. While it is the height of elegance and drapes beautifully, it does not stand up to heavy wear and can be prohibitively expensive. They say that, in the <a href="#chryseosaion">Golden Age</a>, <a href="#pas">everyone</a> wore <i><a href="#byssos">býssos</a>, </i>though this is not factual; more common still were artificed fibers now lost to us.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chalkeosaion"><i>Chálkeos Aiṓn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “bronze aeon”, combining <i><a href="#chalkos">chalkós</a>, <a href="#aion">aiṓn</a>. </i>The Bronze Age of <i><a href="#metallourgia">metallourgía</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#mageia">mageía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chalkos"><i>chalkós<br/>chalkoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “copper”, “bronze”, or even “brass”: <a href="#tis">any</a> of the so-called red <a href="#metallon">metals</a>. These consist of alloys of <a href="#chalkos">copper</a>, <a href="#tis">some</a> more <a href="#chrysos">golden</a> than red. See also: <i><a href="#chalkous">chalkoûs</a>, <a href="#oreichalkos">oreíchalkos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chalkous"><i>chalkoûs<br/>chalkoî</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> <a href="#nomisma">coin</a>, referencing <i><a href="#chalkos">chalkós</a>. </i>It is worth ½ a <i><a href="#tetartemorion">tetartēmórion</a>, </i>hence a 48<span class="superscript">th</span> of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chartes"><i>chártēs<br/>chártai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chart. Literally, “chart”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. A scroll or roll of papyrus, parchment, or similar writing material. Cognate of ‹chart›, ‹charter›, ‹card›; related to the cognates of ‹cartography›, ‹cartel›, ‹cartulary›, ‹cartoon›. See also: <i><a href="#geographia">geōgraphía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="cheimon"><i>Cheimṓn<br/>cheimônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “winter”, “snow”, or “storm”. The <a href="#seasons">season</a> of winter, or a storm. Cognate of ‹chion‑›, ‹chio‑›; related to the cognate of ‹chiolite›, ‹Chionaspis›, ‹Chionanthus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chen"><i>chḗn<br/>chênes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “goose”. Related to the cognates of ‹Chen›, ‹chenops›, ‹chenopod›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="cherrhonesos"><i>cherrhónēsos<br/>cherrhónēsoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chersonese. Literally, “chersonese”, combining <i>chersós, nêsos. </i>Still more literally, “land island”, hence peninsula. Cognate of ‹chersonese›, ‹Chersonesus›; related to the cognates of ‹Polynesia›, ‹Micronesia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chimaira"><i>chímaira<br/>chímairai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chimera. Literally, “chimera”, referencing <i><a href="#cheimon">Cheimṓn</a>. </i>Still more literally, “winter she-goat”, referencing the early example combining the <a href="#pyr">fire</a>-breathing <a href="#kephale">head</a> of a <a href="#leon">lion</a> and the tail of a serpent with the <a href="#soma">body</a> of a <a href="#cheimon">winter</a>-<a href="#gonos">born</a> <a href="#gyne">she</a>-<a href="#aix">goat</a>. A monstrous therianthropic abomination amalgamating the <i><a href="#chromosoma">chromosṓmata</a> </i>of <a href="#anthropos">humans</a> with <a href="#ther">beasts</a> into a fearsome, if improbable, hybrid. Although, to be fair, <a href="#tis">some</a> are quite nice once you get to <a href="#gnosis">know</a> them. Cognate of ‹chimera›.<br/><br/>What? No, of course <i><a href="#hemitheos">hēmítheoi</a> </i>are not <a href="#chimaira">chimeras</a>, no matter how we might <a href="#opsis">appear</a>, for we are <a href="#theos">divine</a>. <a href="#hemitheos">Demigods</a> are <a href="#anthropos">men</a> uplifted toward <a href="#theos">godhood</a>: not <a href="#ther">animals</a> clawing toward <a href="#anthropos">manhood</a>, much less <a href="#anthropos">men</a> crawling like <a href="#ther">beasts</a>. Nor are we capricious mixtures of <a href="#ther">creatures</a>. Do not bring this up again, I caution you<i>!</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chiton"><i>chitṓn<br/>chitônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chiton. Literally, “chiton”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. The ubiquitous sleeveless or short-sleeved tunic, knee-length for <a href="#aner">men</a>, full-length for women. Made from a <a href="#monos">single</a>, rectangular piece of cloth of linen or wool — dyed <a href="#lampros">bright</a> <a href="#chroma">colors</a> and even embroidered — and fastened at the shoulders. Typically donned <a href="#epi">over</a> the <i><a href="#perizoma">perízōma</a> </i>and under the <i><a href="#himation">himátion</a>, </i>cinched with a <i><a href="#zoster">zōstḗr</a> </i>or other <i><a href="#zone">zṓnē</a>. </i>A light, sleeveless version sometimes serves as sleepwear or, for women, even a modest undergarment. Cognate of ‹chiton›, ‹chito‑›; related to the cognates of ‹chitin›, ‹chitosan›. See also: <i><a href="#chitoniskos">chitônískos</a>, <a href="#exomis">exōmís</a>, <a href="#monochiton">monochítôn</a>. </i>Contrast: <i><a href="#peplos">péplos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chitoniskos"><i>chitônískos<br/>chitonískoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “short tunic”. A <a href="#genos">type</a> of <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a>, </i>oft donned by <a href="#pais">children</a> and <a href="#kouros">young men</a>, though also favored by sailors, hunters, and <a href="#hoplites">soldiers</a> for their <a href="#praktikos">practicality</a>. It is worn typically with a loose <i><a href="#zone">zṓnē</a>, </i>for comfort. See also: <i><a href="#exomis">exōmís</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chlamys"><i>chlamýs<br/>chlamýdes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chlamys. Literally, “chlamys”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Still more literally, “mantle”. A short, lightweight woolen <a href="#himation">cloak</a>, fastened at the right shoulder with a clasp, worn in place of the <i><a href="#himation">himátion</a>. </i>As it offers <a href="#megas">greater</a> freedom of movement, it is favored in more athletic and military contexts, making it an optional — though eminently fashionable — addition to the <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a> </i>of <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹chlamys›; related to the cognate of ‹chlamydia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chroma"><i>chrôma<br/>chrṓmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chroma. Literally, “chroma”. Still more literally, “color”. No relation to ‹Firefox›. Cognate of ‹chroma›, ‹chromo‑›, ‹chrom‑›, ‹‑chrome›; related to the cognates of ‹chromatic›, ‹chromium›. See also: <i><a href="#chromosoma">chromósōma</a>, <a href="#polychromos">polýchrōmos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chromosoma"><i>chromósōma<br/>chromosṓmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chromosome. Literally, “chromosome”, combining <i><a href="#chroma">chrôma</a>, <a href="#soma">sôma</a>. </i>Still more literally, “colored body”. A minuscule thread of <a href="#moira">fate</a> within the <i><a href="#pyrenion">pyrēníon</a>, </i>upon which is inscribed the <a href="#hieros">sacred</a> <a href="#gramma">text</a> containing the <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnyma</a> </i>of the <a href="#sarx">flesh</a> written in the <i><a href="section-glossary.xhtml#tetragrammaton">tetragrámmaton</a> <a href="section-glossary.xhtml#alphabetos">alphabētón</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹chromosome›. See also: <i><a href="#metamorphosis">metamórphōsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chryseosaion"><i>Chrýseos Aiṓn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “golden aeon”, combining <i><a href="#chrysos">chrȳsós</a>, <a href="#aion">aiṓn</a>. </i>The Golden Age of <a href="#plethora">plenty</a>. It was the brief, ill-<a href="#moira">fated</a> era after <i><a href="#paliggenesia">Paliggenesía</a> </i>interrupted the previous <i><a href="#aioniosstasis">Aiṓnios Stásis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chrysomelon"><i>chrȳsómēlon<br/>chrȳsómēla</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “gold fruit”, combining <i><a href="#chrysos">chrȳsós</a>, mêlon, </i>hence golden apple. A <a href="#genos">type</a> of <i><a href="#kitron">kítron</a>, </i>not actually an apple, and not so much <a href="#chrysos">golden</a> as orange. Not a melon, either, and contrary to incoherent myths, nor does it grant <a href="#athanatos">immortality</a> — only the <a href="#theos">gods</a> can provide that. A bit sour, a bit <a href="#glykys">sweet</a>: quite tasty and refreshing. Recommended. Related to the cognates of ‹melon›, ‹melo‑›, ‹marmalade›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chrysos"><i>chrȳsós<br/>chrȳsoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “gold”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Related to the cognates of ‹chrysanthemum›, ‹chrysography›, ‹chrysolite›. See also: <i><a href="#metallon">métallon</a>, <a href="#chrysomelon">chrȳsómēlon</a>, <a href="#chryseosaion">Chrýseos Aiṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chthonios"><i>chthónios</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Chthonic. Literally, “chthonic”. Still more literally “of the earth, ground, or underground”, hence infernal. No relation to ‹Cthulhu›, <i><a href="#thanatos">Thánatos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹chthonic›, ‹chthonian›. See also: <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, <a href="#hadeios">hádeios</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="chthoniotheos"><i>chthoniótheos<br/>Chthoniótheoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “infernal god”, combining <i><a href="#chthonios">chthónios</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>See also: <a href="#theos">gods</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="counterearth"><i>Counter-Earth</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p><i><a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a>, </i>not <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, </i>no matter what they might think.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="daimon"><i>daímōn<br/>daímones</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Daemon. Literally, “daemon”. Still more literally, “spirit” or “divine entity”. Even more literally, “distributor (of fate)”. Specifically, an <a href="#nekrozoos">undead</a> <a href="#theos">god</a>, sustained by <i><a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>. </i>Refusing to <a href="#nekros">fade</a> with dignity, it persists as a blight upon <a href="#anthropos">humanity</a>. Cognate of ‹daemon›, ‹demon›; related to the cognate of ‹pandemonium›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#anthropos">ánthrōpos</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#daimonogonos">daimonógonos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="daimonogonos"><i>daimonógonos<br/>daimonógonoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “daemon spawn”, combining <i><a href="#daimon">daímōn</a>, <a href="#gonos">gónos</a>. </i>Undead, it is a <a href="#nous">mindless</a> <i><a href="#automaton">autómaton</a> </i><a href="#gnosis">knowing</a> only <a href="#peinaleos">hunger</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#empousogonos">empousógonos</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#ker">kêr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="daimonoxiphos"><i>daimonoxíphos<br/>daimonoxíphē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “daemon sword”, combining <i><a href="#daimon">daímōn</a>, <a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>. </i>A cursed <a href="#xiphos">sword</a> to which is <a href="#desmos">bound</a> the corrupt <a href="#psyche">soul</a> of a <i><a href="#nekromantis">nekrómantis</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#empousoxiphos">empousoxíphos</a>, <a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="deipnon"><i>deîpnon<br/>deîpna</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “prepared meal”. A meal or feast, particularly a communal dinner. Related to the cognate of ‹deipnosophist›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="deka"><i>déka, dekás<br/>deka‑, dékatos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Deka-. Literally, “deka-”. In cardinal (“ten”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“decad”), combining, and ordinal (“tenth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹deck›. Cognate of ‹deka‑›, ‹dek‑›, ‹deca‑›, ‹dec‑›, ‹decad›; related to the cognates of ‹deci‑›, ‹decade›, ‹December›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>, <i><a href="#dekate">dekátē</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dekadrachmon"><i>dekádrachmon<br/>dekádrachma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “ten drachmas”, combining <i><a href="#deka">déka</a>, <a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>. </i>A <a href="#argyros">silver</a> <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> worth 10 <i><a href="#drachme">drachmaí</a>. </i>Rarely minted, and then oft featuring elaborate designs to mark the special occasion that merited it.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dekania"><i>dekanía<br/>dekaníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “group of ten”, referencing <i><a href="#deka">déka</a>. </i>Specifically, a unit of 10 <i><a href="#machetes">machētaí</a> </i>or even <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplîtai</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dekate"><i>dekátē<br/>dekátai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “tenth (day)”, declining <i><a href="#deka">dékatos</a> </i>to match <i><a href="#hemera">hēméra</a>, </i>and referring now to the <i><a href="#amphidromia">amphidromía</a>. </i>The distinction dates back to a time when the <i>dekátē </i>was a separate event, providing a name for the <a href="#pais">child</a> a few <a href="#hemera">days</a> after it was <a href="#telete">ritually</a> <a href="#katharmos">purified</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dektes"><i>déktēs<br/>déktai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “receiver”. No relation to <i><a href="#deka">déka</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#doretes">dōrētḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="delta"><i>délta<br/>déltai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Delta. Literally, “delta”. This <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a>, </i><a href="#morphe">shaped</a> like an equilateral <a href="#trigonon">triangle</a>, is associated with the <i><a href="#stigma">stígma</a> </i>of the <i><a href="#doule">doúlē</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹delta›; related to the cognate of ‹D›. See also: <i><a href="#deltos">déltos</a>, <a href="#deltion">deltíon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="deltion"><i>deltíon<br/>deltía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “little delta thing”, referencing <i><a href="#delta">délta</a>. </i>A smaller <i><a href="#keropinax">kēropínax</a>, </i>usually <a href="#trigonon">triangular</a> — or at least an acute <i>isoskelḗs <a href="#trapeza">trapezoeidḗs</a></i> — so as to be easily held in <a href="#heis">one</a> hand, resting upon the forearm and supported by the crook of the inner elbow. Contrast with: <i><a href="#deltos">déltos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="deltos"><i>déltos<br/>déltoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “delta thing”, referencing <i><a href="#delta">délta</a>. </i>A full-sized <i><a href="#keropinax">kēropínax</a>, </i>typically a rectangle or <i><a href="#trapeza">trapezoeidḗs</a>, </i>despite the name. Contrast with: <i><a href="#deltion">deltíon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="demesne"><i>demesne</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See <a href="#abode">abode</a>. No relation to <a href="#domain">domain</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="demokratia"><i>dēmokratía<br/>dēmokratíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Democracy. Literally, “democracy”, combining <i><a href="#demos">dêmos</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “rule by the people”. Exactly as <a href="#eu">good</a> — or bad — as the <a href="#demos">people</a>. Cognate of ‹democracy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="demos"><i>dêmos<br/>dêmoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Demo‑. Literally, “demo‑”. Still more literally, “people” or “populace”. Specifically, in the political sense, hence referring only to <i><a href="#polites">polîtai</a>. </i>No relation to ‹demo›. Cognate of ‹demo‑›, ‹dem‑›; related to the cognate of ‹demographics›. See also: <a href="#people">people</a>, <i><a href="#demosonymon">dēmosṓnymon</a>, <a href="#demokratia">dēmokratía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="demosonymon"><i>dēmosṓnymon<br/>dēmosṓnyma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Demonym. Literally, “demonym”, combining <i><a href="#demos">dêmos</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>The possessive <a href="#morphe">form</a> of the <a href="#prosopon">person</a>’s place of <a href="#genos">origin</a>, such as a <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>, </i>used as part of the full name. No relation to ‹demon›. Cognate of ‹demonym›. See also: <i><a href="#ethnoonymon">ethnoṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="derxis"><i>dérxis<br/>dérxeis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “glare”. Still more literally, “piercing gaze”. Related to the cognate of ‹dragon›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#auge">augḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="desmos"><i>desmós<br/>desmoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Desmo‑. Literally, “desmo‑”. Still more literally, “bond”, “tie”, or “fetter”, hence ligament. Cognate of ‹desmo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹desmosome›, ‹desmotomy›. See also: <i><a href="#anypodetos">anypódētos</a>, <a href="#apodesmos">apódesmos</a>, <a href="#diadema">diádēma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="despotes"><i>despótēs<br/>despótai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Despot. Literally, “despot”. Still more literally, “master”, “ruler”. Even more literally, “house lord”. The <a href="#kephale">head</a> of <a href="#oikos">household</a>, holding <a href="#kratos">power</a> <a href="#hyper">over</a> its <a href="#doulos">slaves</a> (and <a href="#gyne">women</a> and <a href="#pais">children</a>, of course). By extension, <a href="#tis">any</a> such leader. The connotations are <a href="#oudeteron">neutral</a>. Cognate of ‹despot›; related to the cognates of ‹potent›, ‹possess›, ‹possible›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="despotonymon"><i>despotṓnymon<br/>despotṓnyma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “despot name”, combining <i><a href="#despotes">despótēs</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>The possessive <a href="#morphe">form</a> of the name of the <a href="#doulos">slave</a>’s <a href="#despotes">owner</a>, used as part of the full name in place of the <i><a href="#patronymikos">patrōnymikós</a>, </i>for a <a href="#doulos">slave</a> is as much your property as your <a href="#gyne">wife</a> or <a href="#pais">children</a> are. See also: <i><a href="#andronymikon">andrōnymikón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dia"><i>diá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “through”, “apart”, “by means of”, “around”. No relation to <i><a href="#hemera">hēméra</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#diadema">diádēma</a>, <a href="#diakritonymion">diakritōnýmion</a>, <a href="#diatheke">diathḗkē</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="diadema"><i>diádēma<br/>diadḗmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Diadem. Literally, “diadem”, combining <i><a href="#dia">diá</a>, <a href="#desmos">desmós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “tied around”. Specifically, a crown or royal headband, including that of a <a href="#theos">god</a>. Cognate of ‹diadem›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="diakritonymion"><i>diakritōnýmion<br/>diakritōnýmia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “distinguishing name”, combining <i><a href="#dia">diá</a>, <a href="#krites">kritḗs</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>When a full name remains ambiguous even with <a href="#pas">all</a> the usual parts, this additional name is added to distinguish the <a href="#prosopon">individual</a>. It is an <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>that is oft based on specifying an occupation, a <a href="#gonos">generation</a>, a <i><a href="#phratria">phrātríā</a>, </i>an achievement, or a <a href="#physikon">physical</a> description. Whether this constitutes a proper part of the full <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> </i>is a matter of much debate within the field of <i><a href="#nomike">nomikḗ</a>, </i>yet a simple fact for the purpose of <i><a href="#telepatheia">tēlepátheia</a>. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹diacritic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="diatheke"><i>diathḗkē<br/>diathêkaì</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “arrangement” or “disposition of affairs”, combining <i><a href="#dia">diá</a>, <a href="#theke">thḗkē</a>. </i>A covenant, <a href="#thelesis">will</a>, or testament.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="didrachmon"><i>dídrachmon<br/>dídrachma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “two drachmas”, combining <i><a href="#dyo">di‑</a>, <a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>. </i> A <a href="#argyros">silver</a> <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> worth 2 <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dike"><i>díkē<br/>díkai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “judgment”, “righteousness”, or “punishment”. Still more literally, “(what is) pointed out”. Effectively, <a href="#tisis">vengeance</a>. <a href="#thnetos">Mortal</a> retribution and punishment, hence <i><a href="#tisis">tísis</a> </i>under guise of <i><a href="#nomike">nomikḗ</a>. </i>No relation to ‹dike›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#themis">thémis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="diobolon"><i>dióbolon<br/>dióbola</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “two obols”, combining <i><a href="#dyo">di‑</a>, <a href="#obolos">obolós</a>. </i>A <a href="#argyros">silver</a> <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> worth 2 <i><a href="#obolos">oboloí</a>, </i>hence a 3<span class="superscript">rd </span>of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>. </i>No relation to ‹diabolic›, ‹Diabolik›. See also: <i><a href="#stater">statḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dodeka"><i>dṓdeka, dōdekás<br/>dōdeka‑, dōdékatos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Dodeca‑. Literally, “dodeca‑”, combining <i><a href="#dyo">dýo</a>, <a href="#deka">déka</a>. </i>Still more literally, “two (and) ten”. In cardinal (“twelve”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“dodecad”), combining, and ordinal (“twelfth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹d12›, I think. Cognate of ‹dodeca‑›, ‹dodec‑›, ‹dodecad›; related to the cognate of ‹dodecahedron›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dolios"><i>Dólios</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Dolus. Literally, “dolus”. Still more literally, “deceitful”, “crafty”, “treacherous”. The Deceiver, <a href="#appellation">appellation</a> of the “influential” <a href="#theos">god</a> of <a href="#klepto">theft</a> and <a href="#pseudos">lies</a>, and <a href="#prostates">patron</a> of the <a href="#agora">market</a>: make of that what you will. Note also that this is the <a href="#zoe">extant</a> <a href="#lykos">lycoid</a> <a href="#theos">deity</a>, not the <a href="#nekros">faded</a> alopecoid <a href="#heis">One</a> who formerly <a href="#kratos">ruled</a> the <i><a href="#agora">agorā́</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹dolus›. See also: <i><a href="#agoraios">Agoraîos</a>, <a href="#apatao">apatáō</a>, <a href="#pseudos">pseûdos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="domain"><i>domain</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>For a <a href="#theos">god</a>, an area — <a href="#ennoia">conceptual</a> or literal — that They hold sway <a href="#hyper">over</a> and may be petitioned for relevant boons. Typically expressed as an <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>and used as an <i><a href="#epiklesis">epiklḗsis</a>. </i>For example, “Master of Minerals”. No relation to <a href="#demesne">demesne</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doretes"><i>dōrētḗs<br/>dōrētaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “donor”, “giver”, “gifter”, referencing <i><a href="#doron">dôron</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹Dorothea›, ‹Dorothy›, ‹Theodoros›, ‹Theodore›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#dektes">déktēs</a></i>. See also: <i><a href="#doterion">Dōtḗrion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doron"><i>dôron<br/>dôra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “gift”, “donation”, “offering”. See also: <i><a href="#doretes">dōrētḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dory"><i>dóry<br/>dórata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Dory. Literally, “dory”. Still more literally, “spear” or “pike”. Even more literally, “wood”. The primary weapon of the <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>, </i>hence an essential part of his <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a>. </i>The shaft, crafted from ash and gently tapered, stands taller than a <a href="#aner">man</a> and is balanced for <a href="#heis">one</a>-handed use, although it can also be thrown. Its front sports a leaf-<a href="#morphe">shaped</a> <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> or <a href="#sideros">iron</a> <i><a href="#aichme">aichmḗ</a>, </i>while the rear bears a <a href="#chalkos">brass</a> or <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> <i><a href="#sauroter">saurōtḗr</a>. </i>No relation to ships or fishes. Cognate of ‹dory›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#xyston">xystón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doryphoroktonon"><i>Doryphoroktónon</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “spear-carrier killer”, combining <i><a href="#doryphoros">doryphóros</a>, <a href="#ktonos">któnos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doryphoros"><i>doryphóros<br/>doryphóroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “spear-carrier”, combining <i><a href="#dory">dóry</a>, <a href="#phoros">phóros</a>. </i>Can refer to a <a href="#hoplites">soldier</a> or <a href="#phylax">guard</a> who carries a <a href="#dory">spear</a>, or more metaphorically, to <a href="#tis">any</a> attendant or follower. Cognate of <i>‹doryfóron›, </i>by which they mean <i><a href="#ouraniodoryphoron">ouraniodoryphóron</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doterion"><i>Dōtḗrion</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “gifter”, referencing <i><a href="#doretes">dōrētḗs</a>. </i>The Gifter, <a href="#appellation">appellation</a> of the <a href="#nekros">faded</a> <a href="#theos">god</a> of <a href="#plethora">plenty</a>. See also: <i><a href="#antidoton">antídoton</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doule"><i>doúlē<br/>doûlai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “female slave”. Though is <a href="#tis">any</a> <a href="#gyne">woman</a> <a href="#aletheia">truly</a> <a href="#eleutheros">free</a>? Related to the cognate of ‹doula›. See also: <i><a href="#doulos">doûlos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="doulos"><i>doûlos<br/>doûloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “male slave”. A <a href="#ther">beast</a> of burden standing on <a href="#dyo">two</a> legs. Like an ‹intern›, only better treated. See also: <i><a href="#doule">doúlē</a>, <a href="#adrapodon">andrápodon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="drachme"><i>drachmḗ<br/>drachmaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Drachma. Literally, “drachma”. Still more literally, “grasp”, alluding to a handful of metal spits. Serves as a unit of weight and also the principle unit of currency, which is defined by a <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> of that weight in <a href="#argyros">silver</a>, worth 6 <i><a href="#obolos">oboloí</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹drachma›; related to the cognate of ‹dram›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="drama"><i>drâma<br/>drámata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Drama. Literally, “drama”. Still more literally, “acting”, “performing”, “doing”. A performance in which actors play characters within a structured narrative. Cognate of ‹drama›. See also: <i><a href="#theatron">théatron</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dynamis"><i>dýnamis<br/>dynámeis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Dynamic. Literally, “dynamic”. Still more literally, “power”, “force”, hence motion. This is the passive sense of power: the capacity to act; the capability, energy, or focus. Cognate of ‹dynamic›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kratos">krátos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="dyo"><i>dýo, dyás<br/>di‑, deúteros</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Dyo‑. Literally, “dyo‑”. In cardinal <a href="#morphe">form</a> (“two”), and then again in collective (“pair”), combining, and ordinal (“second”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹Dio›,
<i><a href="#dia">diá</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹dyo‑›, ‹dy‑›, ‹duo›, ‹deutero‑›, ‹deuter‑›; related to the cognates of ‹two›, ‹dyad›, ‹dual›, ‹duplex›, ‹deuteronomy›, ‹deuterium›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="e"><i>ḗ</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eh? No, <i>ḗ. </i>Just <i>ḗ. </i>Or. Literally, “or”. See also: <i><a href="#kai">kaì</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ear"><i>Éar<br/>éara</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “spring”. The <a href="#seasons">season</a> of spring. Related to the cognate of ‹vernal›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="earth"><i>Earth</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p><i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, </i>not <i><a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a>, </i>no matter what anyone might think.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="edem"><i>edém</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eden. Literally, “eden”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Yet another walled garden, like <i><a href="#paradeisos">parádeisos</a>. </i>When capitalized, refers to a place ostensibly in the far west, like <i><a href="#elysion">Ēlýsion</a>, </i>though perhaps distinct. According to legend, it contained a tree, sacred to the <a href="#theos">gods</a>, upon which hung their <a href="#chrysomelon">golden apples</a> of <a href="#athanatos">immortality</a>. This was itself supposedly <a href="#phylax">guarded</a> by a nymph or a serpent or perhaps a <a href="#derxis">dragon</a>; accounts vary. There is, in <a href="#poiesis">poetry</a>, no <a href="#aletheia">factuality</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="egeiron"><i>egeírōn<br/>egeírontes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “rousing”. A stimulant: <a href="#tis">any</a> exciting or euphoric <i><a href="#pharmakon">phármakon</a>. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹Egeria›. See also: <i><a href="#anazopyrounkaryon">anazōpyroûn káryon</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#kataprayntikos">katapraýntikós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eikon"><i>Eikṓn<br/>Eikônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eikon. Literally, “eikon” or “icon”. Still more literally, “image”, “semblance”, or “likeness”. For a <a href="#theos">god</a>, Their <a href="#hieros">holy</a> Symbol through which They accept <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹eikon›, ‹eikon‑›, ‹icon›, ‹icon‑›. See also: <i><a href="#eikonoklasia">eikonoklasía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eikonoklasia"><i>eikonoklasía<br/>eikonoklasíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Iconoclasm. Literally, “iconoclasm”, combining <i><a href="#eikon">eikṓn</a>, kláō. </i>Still more literally, “shattering images”. The irreverent crime of disrespecting or <a href="#olethros">destroying</a> a <a href="#theos">god’s</a> <i><a href="#eikon">Eikṓn</a>, </i>thus becoming an <i><a href="#eikonoklastes">eikonoklástēs</a>. </i>More broadly, the systematic rejection of established religion. Cognate of ‹iconoclasm›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eikonoklastes"><i>eikonoklastón<br/>eikonoklástai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Iconoclast. Literally, “iconoclast”, referencing <i><a href="#eikonoklasia">eikonoklasía</a>. </i><a href="#heis">One</a> who commits this act. Cognate of ‹iconoclast›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eirene"><i>eirḗnē<br/>eirênai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eirene. Literally, “eirene”. Still more literally, “peace”. It is, I imagine, an unalloyed virtue. Its mythical personification is said to hold the <i><a href="#kerastesplethoras">kéras tēs plēthṓras</a> </i>in its right hand, for surely <a href="#plethora">plenty</a> and peace go together. No relation to <i><a href="#eiron">eírōn</a>, </i>‹Eire›, ‹Christopher Smith›. Cognate of ‹eirene›; related to the cognates of ‹eirenics›, ‹irenics›, ‹eirenicon›, ‹irenicon›, ‹Irene›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eiron"><i>eírōn<br/>eírōnes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eiron. Literally, “eiron”. Still more literally, “speaker” or “dissembler”. A stock character in <i><a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a> </i>who feigns ignorance to remain underestimated and thus outwit the <i><a href="#alazon">alazṓn</a>. </i>Oft <a href="#tis">something</a> of a trickster. For example: <i>‹Sōkrátēs›, </i>‹Bugs Bunny›, ‹Columbo›. No relation to <i><a href="#eirene">eirḗnē</a>, </i>nor (ironically) to <a href="#sideros">iron</a>. Cognate of ‹eiron›; related to the cognate of ‹irony›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eisagogikon"><i>eisagōgikón<br/>eisagōgiká</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Isagoge. Literally, “isagoge”, combining <i>eis, ágō. </i>Still more literally, “introduction” or “lead in”. In the general context of <i><a href="#orthographia">orthographía</a>, </i>a quotation mark. More specifically, the traditional way to quote <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a>, </i>like <i>«toûto». </i>Cognate of ‹isagoge›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#xenoeisagogikon">xenoeisagōgiká</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ek"><i>ek<br/>ex</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ex. Literally, “ex”. Still more literally, “from”, “out of”, “due to”. The <a href="#morphe">forms</a> are for <a href="#lexis">words</a> <a href="#arche">beginning</a> with consonants and vowels, respectively. No relation to ‹exo‑›, nor to ‹ex› as in former, nor, I think, to mutants. Cognate of ‹ex›, ‹ex‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ekdikousa"><i>Ekdikoúsa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “she who avenges”, combining <i><a href="#ek">ek</a>, <a href="#dike">díkē</a>. </i>The Avenger, <a href="#appellation">appellation</a> of the <a href="#love">beloved</a>, <a href="#nekros">faded</a> <a href="#theos">god</a> of merciless <a href="#dike">vengeance</a> and <a href="#olethros">destruction</a>. The <a href="#kosmos">world</a> is, without <a href="#her">Her</a>, empty. See also: <a href="#she">She</a>, <a href="#her">Her</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ekloge"><i>eklogḗ<br/>eklogaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Election. Literally, “election” or “selection”, combining <i><a href="#ek">ek</a>, légō. </i>Still more literally, “pick out of”. Cognate of ‹election›; related to the cognates of ‹eclectic›, ‹elite›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#krisis">krísis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="elaia"><i>elaía<br/>elaîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “olive” or “olive tree”. Related to the cognates of ‹oil›, ‹oleum›. See also: <i><a href="#elaion0">élaion</a>, <a href="#elaion">elaiṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="elaion0"><i>élaion<br/>élaia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “olive oil”, referencing <i><a href="#elaia">elaía</a>. </i>Can refer, also, to other such oils, though not to fat or grease.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="elaion"><i>elaiṓn<br/>elaiṓnes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “olive grove”, referencing <i><a href="#elaia">elaía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="electrum"><i>electrum</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A <a href="#physikon">naturally</a>-occurring alloy of <a href="#chrysos">gold</a> and <a href="#argyros">silver</a> (and sometimes traces of <a href="#chalkos">copper</a> and other <a href="#metallon">metals</a>), used for <a href="#nomisma">coins</a>. See: <i><a href="#elektron">ḗlektron</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#stater">statḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="elektron"><i>ḗlektron<br/>ḗlektra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Electron. Literally, “electron”. Still more literally, “shiny”. Refers to <a href="#electrum">electrum</a> and to amber, as <a href="#amphi">both</a> are shiny. Which <a href="#heis">one</a> is intended is, of course, obvious in context. No relation to <i><a href="#keraunos">keraunós</a> </i>or <i><a href="#lepton">leptón</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹electron›, and related to <i>‹Ēléktra›.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="elephas"><i>eléphas<br/>eléphantes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Elephant. Literally, “elephant”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Cognate of ‹elephant›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eleutheros"><i>eleútheros<br/>eleútheroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eleuthero‑. Literally, “eleuthero‑”. Still more literally, “free”. A free <a href="#prosopon">person</a>, as opposed to a <i><a href="#doulos">doûlos</a>. </i>By implication, if <a href="#arsenikos">male</a> then <i><a href="#polites">polítēs</a>, </i>not <i><a href="#apeleutheros">apeleútheros</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹eleuthero‑›, ‹eleuther‑›; related to the cognates of ‹eleutherogamous›, ‹eleutheromaniac›, ‹eleutherophobia›, ‹Eleutheria›, ‹Eleuthera›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="elysion"><i>ēlýsion<br/>ēlýsia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Elysium. Literally, “elysium”. Refers to the mythical <i><a href="#eutopia">eutopía</a> </i>of the Elysian Fields, in the far west, which may or may not be the same as <i><a href="#edem">Edém</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹Elysium›; related to the cognate of ‹elysian›. See also: <i><a href="#paradeisos">parádeisos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="empatheia"><i>empátheia<br/>empátheiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Empathy. Literally, “empathy”, combining <i><a href="#en">én</a>, <a href="#pathos">páthos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “feeling within”. Traditionally referred to being filled with <a href="#tis">one</a>’s own intense <a href="#pathos">emotion</a>. Cognate of ‹empathy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#sympatheia">sympátheia</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="emporos"><i>émporos<br/>émporoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “merchant” or “trader”, combining <i><a href="#en">én</a>, póros. </i>Still more literally, “in passage”, hence passenger or traveler. No relation to ‹emperor›. Related to the cognates of ‹emporium›, ‹port›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="empousa"><i>émpousa<br/>émpousai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Empousa. Literally, “empousa”, combining <i><a href="#en">én</a>, <a href="#pous">poús</a>. </i>Still more literally, “on (one) foot”. Monstrous <i><a href="#chimaira">chímaira</a> </i>with the <a href="#prosopon">face</a> of a beautiful <a href="#gyne">woman</a>, yet also <i><a href="#onokole">onokṓlē</a>. </i>Appearing at <i><a href="#mesembria">mesēmbría</a>, </i>she uses <i><a href="#polymorphosis">polymórphōsis</a>, <a href="#telepatheia">tēlepátheia</a>, <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a> </i>to seduce and <a href="#phagos">consume</a> <a href="#pais">boys</a> and <a href="#aner">men</a>. Cognate of ‹empousa›, ‹empusa›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="empousogonos"><i>empousógonos<br/>empousógonoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “empusa spawn”, combining <i><a href="#empousa">émpousa</a>, <a href="#gonos">gónos</a>. </i>A <i><a href="#ker">kêr</a> </i>that is essentially equivalent to a <i><a href="#daimonogonos">daimonógonos</a>, </i>the distinction making no difference except to the most needlessly pedantic.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="empousoxiphos"><i>empousoxíphos<br/>empousoxíphē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “empusa sword”, combining <i><a href="#empousa">émpousa</a>, <a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>. </i>Cursed <a href="#xiphos">sword</a> with an <i><a href="#empousa">émpousa</a> </i>trapped within it. Essentially equivalent to a <i><a href="#daimonoxiphos">daimonoxíphos</a>, </i>the distinction making no difference except to the most pedantic.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="empyrion"><i>empýrion<br/>empýria</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Empyrean. Literally, “empyrean”, combining <i><a href="#en">én</a>, <a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>. </i>Still more literally, “on fire”. Metaphorically, “fiery” or “bright”, referring to the <a href="#akros">highest</a> <a href="#ouranoi">heavens</a>. In <a href="#aletheia">reality</a>, a <i><a href="#kenon">kenón</a> </i>cold enough to freeze <a href="#aer">air</a> yet simultaneously <a href="#kaio">burning</a> from the harsh, <a href="#lampros">bright</a> glare of the <a href="#helios">Sun</a>. Cognate of ‹empyrean›, ‹empyreal›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="en"><i>én</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>In. Literally, “in”, “into”, “on”, or “among”. Cognate of ‹in›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ennea"><i>ennéa, enneás<br/>ennea‑, énatos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ennea‑. Literally, “ennea‑”. In cardinal (“nine”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“ennead”), combining, and ordinal (“ninth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#ennoia">énnoia</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ennea‑›, ‹ennead›; related to the cognates of ‹nine›, ‹novem‑›, ‹November›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ennoia"><i>énnoia<br/>énnoiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ennoia. Literally, “ennoia”, combining <i><a href="#en">én</a>, <a href="#nous">noûs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “concept”, “idea”, or “notion”. Even more literally, “inner thought”. A <a href="#nous">mental</a> construct, composed of <i><a href="#stoicheion">stoicheîa</a>, </i>representing <a href="#gnosis">knowledge</a> or <a href="#synesis">understanding</a>. The <a href="#physikon">natural</a> <a href="#glossa">language</a> of <i><a href="#telepatheia">tēlepátheia</a>, </i>though not without its risks. No relation to <i><a href="#ennea">ennéa</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ennoia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="entropia"><i>entropía<br/>entropíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Entropy. Literally, “entropy”, combining <i><a href="#en">én</a>, tropḗ. </i>Still more literally, “turning inward”. Traditionally, referred also to confusion and shame, for obvious reasons. Cognate of ‹entropy›; related to the cognate of ‹trope›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epangelian"><i>epangelían<br/>epangelíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>
Evangelism. Literally, “evangelism”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, <a href="#angelos">ángelos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “promise” or “proclamation”, hence a pledge. An <a href="#athanatos">eternal</a> commitment to a <a href="#theos">god</a>, demanded of a <i><a href="#hemitheos">hēmítheos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹evangelism›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#horkos">hórkos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ephebeia"><i>ephēbeía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ephebe. Literally, “ephebe”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, hḗbē. </i>Still more literally, “early manhood”. A period of training in a <a href="#pais">boy</a>’s <a href="#bios">life</a> before he takes on the <i><a href="#mysterion">mystēria</a> </i>and becomes an adult. The details of this are <a href="#gnosis">known</a> to <a href="#pas">all</a>, except for women, who are left to guess and wonder. Equivalent to, though more formal — and obviously more important — than, <i><a href="#partheneia">partheneía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ephebe›, ‹ephebus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ephemeros"><i>ephḗmeros<br/>ephḗmeroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ephemeral. Literally, “ephemeral”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, <a href="#hemera">hēméra</a>. </i>Still more literally, “for a day”. Cognate of ‹ephemeral›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epi"><i>epí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “on”, “upon”, “over (position)”, “at”, “beside”, “in addition to”, “toward”, “against”, “onto (motion)”. How versatile and ambiguous<i>! </i>I will spare you a list of other entries to see also, as it would be too long to be useful.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epitadexia"><i>epì tà dexiā́</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “toward the right”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, <a href="#he">tà</a>, dexiā́. </i>Typical of modern <a href="#writing">writing</a>, going from left to right. Related to the cognate of ‹dexterity›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epitalaia"><i>epì tà laïá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “toward the left”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, <a href="#he">tà</a>, laïá. </i>Typical of ancient <a href="#writing">writing</a>, going from right to left.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epiklesis"><i>epiklḗsis<br/>epiklḗseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Epiclesis. Literally, “epiclesis”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, klēsis. </i>Still more literally, a “calling upon”. <a href="#invocation">Invocation</a> for a <a href="#theos">god</a>. Cognate of ‹epiclesis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="episteme"><i>epistḗmē<br/>epistêmai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Episteme. Literally, “episteme”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, hístēmi. </i>Still more literally, “knowledge”, hence science. Even more literally, “standing upon”, referring to the stable foundation science provides. Knowledge that is systematic and <a href="#nous">intellectually</a> sound.  Note that <i><a href="#anoteros">anōtéra</a> epistḗmē </i>refers to 
<i><a href="#arkanon">árkanon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹episteme›; related to the cognate of ‹epistemology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epitheton"><i>epítheton<br/>epítheta</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Epithet. Literally, “epithet”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, títhēmi. </i>Still more literally, “something placed upon”. Words used in place of a name to characterize or identify, as by their attributes, habits, or accomplishments. For example: <a href="#mageiros">Butcher</a> of <a href="#anthropos">Men</a>. These <a href="#morphe">form</a> the basis for <a href="#poly">many</a> <a href="#genos">types</a> of <a href="#onoma">names</a> and titles. Cognate of ‹epithet›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="epomenos"><i>epómenos<br/>epómenoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “next” or “following”. No relation to <i><a href="#eponymos">epṓnymos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eponymos"><i>epṓnymos<br/>epṓnymoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eponym. Literally, “eponym”, combining <i><a href="#epi">epí</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>Still more literally, “named after”. The <a href="#anthropos">person</a> — or <a href="#theos">god</a> — for whom a place is named. No relation to <i><a href="#epomenos">epómenos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹eponym›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="erebos"><i>érebos<br/>Érebos Archaîos Bathýskios</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “primordial darkness”, or as personified, “Primeval Deep-Dusky Shadow”. Either deep <a href="#skia">shadow</a>, or the <a href="#poiesis">poetic</a> embodiment of the <a href="#lampros">shining</a> <a href="#zophos">blackness</a> at the <a href="#kardia">heart</a> of a <i><a href="#daimonogonos">daimonógonos</a>. </i>The latter is said to have, with <i><a href="#nyx">Nýx</a>, </i><a href="#pater">fathered</a> <i><a href="#hypnos">Hýpnos</a> </i>and perhaps even <i><a href="#thanatos">Thánatos</a>. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹Erebus›. See also: <i><a href="#skotos">skótos</a>, <a href="#zophos">zóphos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eros"><i>érōs<br/>érōtes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eros. Literally, “eros”. Romantic or passionate <a href="#love">love</a>, which makes <a href="#moron">fools</a> of us <a href="#pas">all</a>. Cognate of ‹eros›; related to the cognate of ‹erotic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eschatos"><i>éschatos<br/>éschatoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eschato‑. Literally, “eschato‑”. Still more literally, “last”, “final”, “furthest”, or “ultimate”. Still more literally, “beyond end”. No relation with ‹cat› or ‹ChatGPT›, I think. Cognate of ‹eschato‑›; related to the cognates of ‹eschatocol›, ‹eschatology›, ‹eschaton›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#protos">prôtos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="esoptron"><i>ésoptron<br/>ésoptra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “mirror”, combining <i>eis, <a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “looked within”. Made of polished <a href="#metallon">metal</a>, usually <i><a href="#chalkos">chalkós</a>, </i>though sometimes of <i><a href="#argyros">árgyros</a> </i>or <i><a href="#chrysos">chrȳsós</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹esoteric›, ‹optical›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ethnoonymon"><i>ethnoṓnymon<br/>ethnoṓnyma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ethnonym. Literally, “ethnonym”, combining <i><a href="#ethnos">éthnos</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>The possessive <a href="#morphe">form</a> of the <a href="#prosopon">person</a>’s ethnicity, such as their barbarian tribe, used as part of the full name. No relation to <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ethnonym›. See also: <i><a href="#demosonymon">dēmosṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ethnos"><i>éthnos<br/>éthnē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ethno‑. Literally, “ethno‑”. Still more literally, “ethnicity”. Even more literally, “nation”, “tribe”, or “people”. A group defined by shared ancestry, <a href="#glossa">language</a>, and <a href="#ethnos">culture</a>, hence including <a href="#pas">all</a> its <a href="#laos">people</a>. No relation to ‹Eithne›. Cognate of ‹ethnicity›, ‹ethno‑›. See also: <a href="#people">people</a>, <i><a href="#demos">dêmos</a>, <a href="#ethnoonymon">ethnoṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="etymomorphe"><i>etymomorphḗ<br/>etymomorphaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “true shape”, combining <i><a href="#etymos">étymos</a>, <a href="#morphe">morphḗ</a>. </i>The <a href="#etymos">true</a> self, as dictated by <a href="#heis">ones</a> <i><a href="#chromosoma">chromosṓmata</a>. </i>It is altered by <i><a href="#metamorphosis">metamórphōsis</a>, though </i>not <i><a href="#polymorphosis">polymórphōsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="etymon"><i>étymon<br/>étyma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Etymon. Literally, “etymon”, referencing <i><a href="#etymos">étymos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “true meaning”. The <a href="#genos">original</a> meaning of a <a href="#lexis">word</a>, oft stemming from the <a href="#glossa">language</a> it came from. Cognate of ‹etymon›; related to the cognate of ‹etymology›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="etymonymon"><i>etymṓnymon<br/>etymṓnyma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “true name”, combining <i><a href="#etymos">étymos</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i><a href="#hieros">Sacred</a>, though not necessarily secret. Refers to the <a href="#prosopon">personal</a> name, and also to the full name that contains it; the latter being necessary for such things as <i><a href="#telepatheia">tēlepátheia</a>. </i>For a <a href="#theos">god</a>, the <i><a href="#etymonymon">Etymṓnymon</a> </i>is Their immutable identity, and this <a href="#name">Name</a> is used always in <a href="#euche">prayer</a>, alongside Their <i><a href="#epiklesis">epiklḗsis</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#ethnoonymon">ethnoṓnymon</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹antonym›, ‹pseudonym›. See also: <i><a href="#blasphemia">blasphēmía</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#prosonymia">prosonymía</a>, <a href="#etymon">étymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="etymos"><i>étymos<br/>étymoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Etym‑. Literally, “etym‑”. Still more literally, “true”, “genuine”, or “authentic”. Specifically, truth in the sense of essential <a href="#physis">nature</a>, not simply <a href="#aletheia">factuality</a>, much less honesty. Cognate of ‹etym‑›; related to the cognate of ‹etymology›. See also: <i><a href="#etymon">étymon</a>, <a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a>, <a href="#etymomorphe">etymomorphḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eu"><i>eû</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eu‑. Literally, “eu‑”. Still more literally, “good” or “well”. Goodness in term of action, condition, or outcome. No relation to ‹European Union›. Cognate of ‹eu‑›; related to the cognates of ‹eudaimonism›, ‹euphoria›, ‹eugenics›. See also: <i><a href="#agathos">agathós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="euche"><i>euchḗ<br/>euchaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “prayer”, referencing <i><a href="#eu">eû</a>. </i>Still more literally, “good utterance”. The <a href="#thysia">sacrifice</a> of <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>, </i>accompanied by a humble request for <a href="#eu">divine</a> aid. No relation to ‹ouch›. Related to the cognates of ‹eucharist›, ‹euphony›, ‹euphemism›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#blasphemia">blasphēmía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="euethes"><i>euḗthēs<br/>euḗtheis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fool”, combining <i><a href="#eu">eû</a>, êthos. </i>Still more literally, “good disposition”. Specifically, a simple-minded person who is easily <a href="#apatao">deceived</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#aphron">áphrōn</a>, <a href="#moron">mōrós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="eutopia"><i>eutopía<br/>eutopíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eutopia. Literally, “eutopia”, combining <i><a href="#eu">eû</a>, <a href="#topos">tópos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “good place”. The mythical Good Place, with its endless <i><a href="#baklavas">baklavás</a>. </i>The exact opposite of <i><a href="#outopia">outopía</a>, </i>or is it? Cognate of ‹eutopia›; related to the cognates of ‹utopia›, ‹topological›. See also: <i><a href="#paradeisos">parádeisos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="exo"><i>éxō</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Exo‑. Literally, “exo‑”. Still more literally, “out”, “outside”, or “beyond”. Cognate of ‹exo‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="exomis"><i>exōmís<br/>exōmídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Exomis. Literally, “exomis”, combining <i><a href="#exo">éxō</a>, ōmos. </i>Still more literally, “off the shoulder”. A <a href="#genos">type</a> of short <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a> </i>fastened <a href="#epi">over</a> the left shoulder, leaving the right arm bare to the chest. Like the <i><a href="#chitoniskos">chitônískos</a>, </i>it is favored by those with <a href="#praktikos">practical</a> considerations and less interest in dignity, such as manual laborers, <a href="#doulos">slaves</a>, and especially <a href="#hoplites">soldiers</a>. Typically worn with the <i><a href="#chlamys">chlamýs</a>. </i>No relation to ‹exomes›. Cognate of ‹exomis›; related to the cognates of ‹omoplate›, ‹omalgia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="exostrakisthe"><i>exōstrakísthē<br/>exōstrakísthēsan</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ostracized. Literally, “ostracized”, referencing <i><a href="#ek">ek</a>, óstrakon. </i>Still more literally, “(cast) out by potsherd”, referring to the practice of writing a <a href="#prosopon">person</a>’s name on a <a href="#keramike">pottery</a> shard. Cognate of ‹ostracize›; related to the cognates of ‹osteo‑›, ‹ossify›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="failedwanderer"><i>Failed Wanderer</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Alludes to an <i><a href="#asteroeides">asteroeidḗs</a> </i>being too small to count as a <a href="#wanderers">Wanderer</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="fournumeracies"><i>four numeracies</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#arithmetike">arithmētikḗ</a>, <a href="#geometria">geōmetría</a>, <a href="#mousike">mousikḗ</a>, <a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#paideiaeleutheron">paidéia eleuthérōn</a>, <a href="#mathematikon">mathēmatikón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gala"><i>gála, gálakta</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “milk”. Related to the cognates of ‹galactose›, ‹lactose›, ‹galaxy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="galatespaparounes"><i>gála tês paparoúnēs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “milk of the poppy”, combining <i><a href="#gala">gála</a>, <a href="#tes">tês</a>, paparoúnē. </i>An <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>for <i><a href="#opion">ópion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gamos"><i>gámos<br/>gámoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “marriage” or “wedding”. No relation to
<i><a href="#gonos">gónos</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹gamete›, ‹exogamy›, ‹cryptogam›. See also: <i><a href="#monogmaia">monogamía</a>, <a href="#polygamia">polygamía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ge"><i>Gê</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Geo‑. Literally, “geo‑”. Still more literally, “earth”. The planet <a href="#earth">Earth</a>, if we consider it a <i><a href="#planetes">planḗtēs</a>, </i>as we should. Cognate of ‹geo‑›; related to the cognate of ‹geology›. See also: <i><a href="#chthonios">chthónios</a>, <a href="#geographia">geōgraphía</a>, <a href="#geometria">geōmetría</a>, <a href="#gesmorphopoias">gês morphopoḯas</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="genos"><i>génos<br/>génē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Gene. Literally, “gene”. Still more literally, “origin”, “race”, “lineage”, “kind”, “type”. Even more literally, “birth”. Cognate of ‹gene›, ‹geno‑›, ‹gen‑›, ‹‑gen›, ‹‑gene›, ‹‑geny›, ‹‑genic›, ‹‑genetic›; related to the cognates of ‹genesis›, ‹genetic›, ‹genealogy›, ‹genus›, ‹generic›, ‹generate›, ‹generous›, ‹general›, and <a href="#poly">many</a> more such <a href="#gonos">offspring</a>. See also: <i><a href="#paliggenesia">paliggenesía</a>, <a href="#nitrogenes">nitrogenḗs</a>, <a href="#gonos">gónos</a>, <a href="#goneus">goneús</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="geographia"><i>geōgraphía<br/>geōgraphíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Geography. Literally, “geography”, combining <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, <a href="#graphis">graphís</a>. </i>Still more literally, “land description”. Cognate of ‹geography›. See also: <i><a href="#chartes">chártēs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="geometria"><i>geōmetría<br/>geōmetríai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Geometry. Literally, “geometry”, combining <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, <a href="#metrikos">metrikós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “land measurement”. Cognate of ‹geometry›. See also: <a href="#fournumeracies">four numeracies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gesmorphopoias"><i>gês morphopoḯas<br/>gês morphopoḯai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “earth shaping”, combining <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a>, <a href="#morphe">morphḗ</a>, <a href="#poiesis">poíēsis</a>. </i>Terraforming.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="glaux"><i>glaúx<br/>glaukés</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Glauco‑. Literally, “glauco‑”. Still more literally, “(little) owl”. Even more literally, “gray”. Cognate of ‹glauco‑›, ‹glauc‑›; related to the cognates of ‹glaux›, ‹glaucoma›, ‹glaucous›, ‹glaucope›, ‹glaucophane›, ‹glaukomflecken›. See also: <i><a href="#sophoglaux">Sophóglaux</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gloss"><i>gloss</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A brief explanation for an obscure or foreign <a href="#lexis">word</a>; hence glossaries. No relation to ‹gloss› as in ‹glossy›. Related to <i><a href="#glossa">glôssa</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="glossa"><i>glôssa<br/>glôssai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “tongue”. Metaphorically, “language”. Related to the cognates of ‹glosso‑›, ‹glossary›, ‹gloss›, ‹glossolalia›, ‹glottis›. See also: <a href="#gloss">gloss</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="glykys"><i>glykýs<br/>glykeîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Gluco‑. Literally, “gluco‑”. Still more literally, “sweet”. Also, metaphorically. Cognate of ‹gluco‑›, ‹gluc‑›, ‹glucose›; related to the cognate of ‹glycogen›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="glypton"><i>glyptón<br/>glyptá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Glyph. Literally, “glyph”. Still more literally, “sculpture” or “statue”. Even more literally, “carved object”. Cognate of ‹glyph›, related to the cognates of ‹cleave›, ‹hieroglyphics›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gnorisis"><i>gnṓrisis<br/>gnṓriseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “the act of making known”, “acknowledgment”, “recognition”, referencing <i><a href="#gnosis">gnôsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gnosis"><i>gnôsis<br/>gnôseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Gnosis. Literally “gnosis”. Still more literally, “knowledge”, oft with esoteric connotations. Cognate of ‹gnosis›; related to the cognate of ‹know›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="goessa"><i>góēssa<br/>góēssai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sorceress”. See also: <i><a href="#goeteia">goēteía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="goeteia"><i>goēteía<br/>goēteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Goetia. Literally, “goetia”. Still more literally, “sorcery”. Even more literally, “wailing”, alluding to chants. Essentially, <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>, </i>though more specifically referring to enchantment and oft <a href="#phoros">bearing</a> a negative connotation. No relation to <a href="#aix">goats</a>, ‹goatse›. Cognate of ‹goetia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="goneus"><i>goneús<br/>goneîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “parent”, referencing <i><a href="#gonos">gónos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “birther”. No relation to ‹Obama›. See also: <i><a href="#theogoneus">theogoneús</a>, <a href="#pater">patḗr</a>, <a href="#meter">mḗtēr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gonia"><i>gōnía<br/>gōníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Gonio‑. Literally, “gonio‑”. Still more literally, “angle” or “corner”. Even more literally, “bend”, “knee”, or “joint”. No relation to ‹Patagonia›, <i><a href="#gonos">gónos</a></i>. Cognate of ‹gonio‑›, ‹goni‑›; related to the cognates of ‹gonion›, ‹gonitis›, ‹goniopuncture›. See also: <i><a href="#polygonon">polýgōnon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gonos"><i>gónos<br/>gónoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “spawn”, referencing <i><a href="#genos">génos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “offspring”, “progeny”, “procreation”, “product”. No relation to <i><a href="#gamos">gámos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹gonad›, ‹‑gonic›. See also: <i><a href="#daimonogonos">daimonógonos</a>, <a href="#empousogonos">empousógonos</a>, <a href="#goneus">goneús</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gramma"><i>grámma<br/>grámmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Gramma‑. Literally, “gramma‑”, related to <i><a href="#graphis">graphís</a>. </i>Still more literally, “letter”. Either a missive or a part of the <i><a href="#alphabetos">álphabētos</a>. </i>No relation to ‹gramma›, ‹grama›. Related to the cognates of ‹gramma‑›, ‹‑gram›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="grammatike"><i>grammatikḗ<br/>grammatikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Grammar. Literally, “grammar”, hence literacy. Still more literally, “study of letters”, referencing <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a>. </i>See also: <a href="#threeliteracies">three literacies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="grapheion"><i>grapheîon<br/>grapheîa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “writing room”, referencing <i><a href="#graphis">graphís</a>. </i>Specifically, a business or administrative office open to clients.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="graphis"><i>graphís<br/>graphídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “writer”. Specifically, a stylus, pencil, or brush. For the <i><a href="#keropinax">kēropínax</a>, </i>a small <i><a href="#rhabdos">rhábdos</a> </i><a href="#poiesis">made</a> of <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a>, <a href="#osteon">bone</a>, or ivory; it is sharp at <a href="#heis">one</a> end so as to cut into the <a href="#keros">wax</a> and blunt at the other so as to flatten it. Related to the cognates of ‹graph›, ‹‑graph›, ‹‑graphy›, ‹graphic›, ‹graphite›, ‹graffiti›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="griphos"><i>grîphos<br/>grîphoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “riddle” or “puzzle”. No relation to ‹griffin›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gynaikeion"><i>gynaikeîon<br/>gynaikeîa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “female place”, referencing <i><a href="#gyne">gynḗ</a>. </i>In a proper house, it is the area in the rear or upstairs, specifically designated for women and their housework. This labor is largely concerned with the production and care of textiles and children. Children and female visitors have free access, and the men of the household may visit, while male visitors are strictly excluded. Modestly decorated, as befits the modest needs of modest women. As goes the <i><a href="#aphorismos">aphorismós</a>, </i>“a woman’s place is in the woman’s place”. Contrast with: <i><a href="#andron">andrṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="gyne"><i>gynḗ<br/>gynaîkes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Gyno‑. Literally, “gyno‑”. Still more literally, “woman” or “wife”. Like <i><a href="#aner">anḗr</a>, </i>only inferior, due to being <i><a href="#theleia">thḗleia</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹gyno‑›, ‹gyn‑›; related to the cognates of ‹gynecology›, ‹gynecomastia›. See also: <i><a href="#gynaikeion">gynaikeîon</a>, <a href="#androgynon">andrógynon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hadeios"><i>hádeios<br/>hádeioi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hadean. Literally, “hadean”, referencing “Hades”: the <a href="#poiesis">poetic</a> name for the <a href="#skotos">gray</a> Hollows of the <a href="#earth">Earth</a>. Hence, infernal, underworldly. Cognate of ‹hadean›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#ouranios">ouránios</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#chthonios">chthónios</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hadyton"><i>hádyton<br/>hádyta</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Adytum. Literally, “adytum”, combining <i><a href="#a">a‑</a>, dýō. </i>Still more literally, “not to be entered”. The innermost <a href="#asylon">sanctuary</a> of a <i><a href="#naos">naós</a>, </i>open only to <i><a href="#hiereus">hiereîs</a>: </i>the <i><a href="#hagia">hágia hagíōn</a>, </i>or cella. Cognate of ‹adytum›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hagia"><i>hágia<br/>hágia hagíōn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hagia. Literally, “hagia”. Still more literally, “holy”. Applies to people, <a href="#theos">divine</a> qualities, spiritual concepts. The “holy of holies” refers to the sanctum sanctorum known as <i><a href="#hadyton">hádyton</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹hagia›. See also: <i><a href="#hagios">hágios</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#hieros">hierós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hagiokeleuthos"><i>Hagiokéleuthos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “holy path”, combining <i><a href="#hagia">hágia</a>, kéleuthos. </i>The <a href="#theos">divine</a> plan for <a href="#thnetos">mortals</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hagios"><i>hágios<br/>hágioi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hagio‑. Literally, “hagio‑”, referencing <i><a href="#hagia">hágia</a>. </i>Still more literally, “holy (one)”, hence a saint. Even more literally, “standing in awe of”. No relation to hags. Cognate of ‹hagio‑›; related to the cognates of ‹hagiography›, ‹hagiology›, ‹hagiolith›. See also: <i><a href="#hieros">hierós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="haima"><i>haîma<br/>haímata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Heme. Literally, “heme”. Still more literally, “blood”. Cognate of ‹heme›, ‹hemato‑›, ‹hemat‑›, ‹hem‑›; related to the cognates of ‹hematal›, ‹hematology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hamartia"><i>hamartía<br/>hamartíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hamartia. Literally, “hamartia”. Still more literally, “sin”, “error”, or “failure”. Even more literally, “missing the mark”. Ranges from an oopsie, to a <a href="#tragoidia">tragic</a> flaw inherent in <a href="#tis">one</a>’s nature, to an unforgivable abomination. Cognate of ‹hamartia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hapaxlegomenon"><i>hápax legómenon<br/>hápax legómena</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hapax legomenon. Literally, “hapax legomenon”, combining <i>hápax, legómenon. </i>Still more literally, “said once”. A term found only once within a particular <i><a href="#lexis">léxis</a>, </i>and yet I keep saying it again and again. Hapax! Cognate of ‹hapax legomenon›, ‹hapax›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="he"><i>hē, ho, tò<br/>hai, hoi, tà</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “the”. The nominative definite article, applying to the subject of the verb, in <a href="#theleia">feminine</a>, <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>, and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively, and then again in plural. See also: <a href="#the">the</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hedra"><i>hédra<br/>hédrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>‑Hedra. Literally, “‑hedra”. Still more literally, “base”, “foundation”, “face (of a 3D <a href="#geometria">geometric</a> shape)”. Even more literally, “seat”. Cognate of ‹‑hedra›, ‹‑hedron›. No relation to ‹Al-Qaeda›, I think. Related to the cognates of ‹cathedral›, ‹exedra›, ‹polyhedron›. See also: <i><a href="#tetraedron">tetráedron</a>, <a href="#polyedron">polýedron</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#gonia">gōnía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hegemonia"><i>hēgemonía<br/>hēgemoníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hegemony. Literally, “hegemony”. No relation to ‹money›. Cognate of ‹hegemony›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heis"><i>heîs, mía<br/>hén, mono‑</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Heno‑. Literally, “heno‑”. In cardinal <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>, <a href="#theleia">feminine</a>, and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a> (“one”), respectively, and then again in combining <a href="#morphe">form</a> (which comes from <i><a href="#monos">mónos</a>), </i>with <i><a href="#protos">prôtos</a> </i>as the ordinal (“first”). No relation to ‹heist›, ‹hen›. Cognate of ‹mono‑›, ‹mon‑›; related to the cognate of ‹henotheism›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heliakonsystema"><i>Hēliakòn Sýstēma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “solar system”, combining <i><a href="#helios">Hḗlios</a>, sýstēma.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heliokinetikos"><i>heliokinētikós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “moving with the sun”, combining <i><a href="#helios">Hḗlios</a>, <a href="#kinesis">kínēsis</a>, </i>hence clockwise. Traveling in the direction of the <a href="#helios">Sun</a>, hence that of a sundial. Contrast with: <i><a href="#antiheliokinetikos">antiheliokinētikós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="helios"><i>Hḗlios</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Helio‑. Literally, “helio‑”. Still more literally, “sun”. Cognate of ‹helio‑›, ‹heli‑›; related to the cognates of ‹heliocentric›, ‹helium›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hemera"><i>hēméra<br/>hēmérai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hemera. Literally, “hemera”. Still more literally, “day”, “daylight”. Cognate of ‹hemera›; related to the cognate of ‹hemeralopia›, ‹ahemeral›. See also: <a href="#times">times</a>, <i><a href="#mesembria">mesēmbría</a>, <a href="#ephemeros">ephḗmeros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hemiobolion"><i>hēmiōbólion<br/>hēmiōbólia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “half-obol”, combining <i><a href="#hemisys">hḗmisys</a>, <a href="#obolos">obolós</a>. </i>Specifically, a <a href="#argyros">silver</a> <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> worth ½ an <i><a href="#obolos">obolós</a>, </i>hence a 12<span class="superscript">th </span>of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hemiolia"><i>hēmiolía<br/>hēmiolíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hemiola. Literally, “hemiola”, combining <i><a href="#hemisys">hḗmisys</a>, hólos. </i>Still more literally, “half and a whole”. Refers to a <a href="#genos">type</a> of light, fast warship, for obvious reasons. Less importantly, when considered as a ratio of 3:1, it has also various meanings in the fields of <i><a href="#mousike">mousikḗ</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#mathematikon">mathēmatiká</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹hemiola›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hemisphairion"><i>hēmisphaírion<br/>hēmisphaíria</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>
Hemisphere. Literally, “hemisphere”, combining <i><a href="#hemisys">hḗmisys</a>, <a href="#sphaira">sphaîra</a>. </i>Still more literally, “half sphere”. Cognate of ‹hemisphere›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hemisys"><i>hḗmisys<br/>hēmísoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hemi‑. Literally, “hemi‑”. Still more literally, “half”, akin to “semi”. Cognate of ‹hemi‑›, ‹hemi›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hemitheos"><i>hēmítheos<br/>hēmítheoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “half-god”, combining <i><a href="#hemisys">hḗmisys</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>, </i>hence a demigod. And perhaps, <a href="#heis">one</a> <a href="#hemera">day</a>, a <a href="#theos">god</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#anthropos">ánthrōpos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hendeka"><i>héndeka, hendekás<br/>hendeka‑, hendékatos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hendeca‑. Literally, “hendeca‑”, combining <i><a href="#heis">heîs</a>, <a href="#deka">déka</a>. </i>Still more literally, “one (and) ten”. In cardinal (“eleven”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“hendecad”), combining, and ordinal “eleventh” <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. Cognate of ‹hendeca‑›, ‹hendec‑›, ‹hendecad›; related to the cognate of ‹hendecasyllabic›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heorte"><i>heortḗ<br/>heortaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “festival” or “celebration”. Not just a party: a religious observance. Related to the cognate of ‹heortology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heos"><i>hēṓs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eos. Literally, “eos”. Still more literally, “dawn”. It is the phenomenon of sunrise, not the time of <a href="#hemera">day</a>, which is <i><a href="#orthros">órthros</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹eos›. See also: <i><a href="#heosphoros">Heōsphóros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heosphoros"><i>Heōsphóros</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “dawn-bringer”, combining <i><a href="#heos">hēṓs</a>, <a href="#phoros">phóros</a>. </i>Specifically, the <a href="#proinos">Morning</a> <a href="#aster">Star</a>, which rises ahead of the <a href="#helios">Sun</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#hesperos">Hésperos</a>, </i>I think. See also: <i><a href="#phosphoros">Phōsphóros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hepar"><i>hêpar<br/>hēpata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hepato‑. Literally, “hepato‑”. Still more literally, “liver”. Traditionally considered the <a href="#hedra">seat</a> of <a href="#pathos">emotions</a>, for obvious reasons. Cognate of ‹hepato‑›, ‹hepat‑›; related to the cognates of ‹hepatic›, ‹hepatitis›, ‹heparin›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hepatoskopia"><i>hēpatoskopía<br/>hēpatoskopíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “liver looking”, combining <i><a href="#hepar">hêpar</a>, <a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>. </i>A <a href="#morphe">form</a> of <a href="#manteia">divination</a> based on examining entrails.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hepta"><i>heptá, heptás<br/>hepta‑, hébdomos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hepta‑. Literally “hepta‑”. In cardinal (“seven”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“heptad”), combining and ordinal “seventh” <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹haptic›. Cognate of ‹hepta‑›, ‹hept‑›, ‹heptad›; related to the cognate of ‹seven›, ‹sept‑›, ‹September›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="her"><i>Her</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p><a href="#she0">She</a> is who I mean.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="her0">Her<i>!</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Obviously, I’m referring to <i><a href="#ekdikousa">Ekdikoúsa</a>. </i>Who else might I mean?</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hermaphroditon"><i>hermaphróditon<br/>hermaphródita</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hermaphrodite. Literally, “hermaphrodite” or “hermaphroditic”. If you must <a href="#episteme">know</a>, while the vagina is as you might expect, what would be the clitoris is instead a <i><a href="#phallos">phallós</a> </i>in full. There is no <i>ourḗthra, </i>as such, since the kidneys — much as in a bird — <a href="#kenon">void</a> the urates as a thick paste directly to the urodeum of the cloaca via ureters. Instead, the <i><a href="#phallos">phallós</a> </i>is plumbed to the testis—which lays in the abdomen, parallel to the ovary—by a tube technically <a href="#episteme">known</a> as an <i>androphóros: </i>the androduct.<br/> I would go on to explain how self-impregnation is made impossible, yet you seem a bit unwell. Perhaps I ought not have shared those rather vividly illustrative <i><a href="#phantasia">phantasíai</a>? </i>Cognate of ‹hermaphrodite›. See also: <i><a href="#arsenothely">arsenóthēly</a>, <a href="#androgynon">andrógynon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hespera"><i>hespéra<br/>hespérai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “evening” or “dusk”. Refers also to the west, for obvious reasons. Basis of the cognates of ‹Hesperus›, ‹vespers›. See also: <a href="#times">times</a>, <i><a href="#hesperos">Hésperos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hesperos"><i>Hésperos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “evening (star)”, referencing <i><a href="#hespera">hespéra</a>. </i>Specifically, the <a href="#hespera">Evening</a> <a href="#aster">Star</a>, which rises as the <a href="#helios">Sun</a> sets. No relation to <i><a href="#heosphoros">Heōsphóros</a>, </i>I think.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hestiaslithos"><i>Hestías Líthos<br/>hestías líthoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “stone of the hearth”, combining <i>hestías, <a href="#lithos">líthos</a>. </i>Housed in <i><a href="#prytaneion">Prytaneîon</a>, </i>it is the <a href="#athanatos">eternal</a> symbol of a <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>; </i>to capture it is to conquer the <a href="#polis">city-state</a>. Related to the cognates of ‹Hestia›, ‹vestal›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heureka"><i>heúrēka</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Eureka. Literally, “eureka”, referencing <i><a href="#heurisko">heurískō</a>. </i>Still more literally, “I have found (it)!”. Cognate of ‹eureka›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="heurisko"><i>heurískō</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Heuristic. Literally, “heuristic”. Still more literally, “find” or “discover”. Cognate of ‹heuristic›. See also: <i><a href="#heureka">heúrēka</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hex"><i>héx, hexás<br/>hexa‑, héktos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hexa‑. Literally “hexa‑”. In cardinal (“six”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“hexad”), combining and ordinal (“sixth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹hex› in the sense of <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>, </i>nor to ‹hecto‑›, ‹hect‑›. Cognate of ‹hexa‑›, ‹hex‑›, ‹hex›, ‹hexad›; related to the cognates of ‹six›, ‹sext‑›, ‹hexagon›, ‹hexadecimal›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hierarchia"><i>hierarchía<br/>hierarchíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hierarchy. Literally, “hierarchy”, combining <i><a href="#hiereus">hiereús</a>, <a href="#arche">archḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “holy rule”. The <a href="#theos">divine</a> ordering imposed by the <a href="#theos">gods</a>, ranking <a href="#pas">all</a> from most <a href="#hieros">holy</a> to least: placing the <a href="#hagia">pure</a> in charge of the impure. What could be more <a href="#dike">righteous</a>? Cognate of ‹hierarchy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hierax"><i>hiérax<br/>hiérakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “hawk” or “falcon”. Traditionally seen as a <a href="#theos">divine</a> <i><a href="#angelos">ángelos</a>, </i>due to its speed and ferocity. Though, in <a href="#aletheia">truth</a>, the <a href="#theos">gods</a> prefer doves. No relation to ‹hyrax›. Related to the cognates of ‹hierofalcon›, ‹hieracology›, ‹Microhierax›, ‹Hieraaetus›, ‹Hieracium›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hiereia"><i>hiéreia<br/>hiéreiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Priestess, akin to <i><a href="#hiereus">hiereús</a>, </i>only inferior. See also: <a href="#priesthood">priesthood</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hiereus"><i>hiereús<br/>hiereîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sacred (one)”, referencing <i><a href="#hieros">hierós</a>. </i>Specifically, a priest. Related to the cognates of ‹hierophant›, ‹hieratic›, ‹hieroglyph›. See also: <a href="#priesthood">priesthood</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hierobasileus"><i>hierobasileús<br/>hierobasileîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “priest-king”, combining <i><a href="#hiereus">hiereús</a>, <a href="#basileus">basileús</a>. </i>Formerly, rulers of <i><a href="#polis">póleis</a> </i>who were appointed directly by the <a href="#theos">gods</a>, in the wake of the <a href="#chryseosaion">Golden Age</a>, to lead the <a href="#anthropos">people</a> onto the <i><a href="#hagiokeleuthos">Hagiokéleuthos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hieros"><i>hierós<br/>hierá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sacred”, “holy”, “hallowed”. Applies to <a href="#telete">rituals</a>, <a href="#naos">temples</a>, objects, <a href="#priesthood">priests</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#hagia">hágia</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="himation"><i>himátion<br/>himátia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Himation. Literally, “himation”. Still more literally, “cape” or “cloak”. Even more literally, “small garment”. It is draped <a href="#epi">over</a> <a href="#amphi">both</a> shoulders loosely, like a mantle. Typically worn <a href="#epi">over</a> <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a> </i>or <i><a href="#exomis">exōmís</a>; </i>or if they are not so fortunate as to be <a href="#arsenikos">male</a>, perhaps <i><a href="#peplos">péplos</a>. </i>Can also be used as a blanket for <a href="#hypnos">sleeping</a>, particularly when traveling. Cognate of ‹himation›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#birrhos">bírrhos</a>, <a href="#chlamys">chlamýs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="holkas"><i>hólkas<br/>holkádes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hulk. Literally, “hulk”. Still more literally, “pulled” or “towed”. A cargo ship or freighter, particularly <a href="#tis">one</a> that is heavy or clumsy. Cognate of ‹hulk›, ‹Hulk›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="holmos"><i>hólmos<br/>hólmoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “mortar”. A vessel for grinding with a <i><a href="#plektron">plēktron</a>. </i>No relation to ‹helm›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="homichle"><i>homíchlē<br/>homíchlai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fog” or “dense mist”. Also, metaphorically. Related to the cognate of ‹mist›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hoplites"><i>hoplítēs<br/>hoplîtai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hoplite. Literally, “hoplite”, referencing <i><a href="#hoplon">hóplon</a>. </i>Still more literally, “armed man”. A heavy infantryman, drawn from the militia, who arms himself with the typical <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a>, </i>or at least as <a href="#eu">well</a> as his means allow. Cognate of ‹hoplite›. See also: <i><a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hoplomachia"><i>hoplomachía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “armed combat”, combining <i><a href="#hoplon">hóplon</a>, <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hoplon"><i>hóplon<br/>hópla</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hoplo‑. Literally, “hoplo‑”. Still more literally, “weapon” or “armor”. Even more literally, “tool”. Often refers to the <i><a href="#aspis">aspís</a>, </i>given its central importance. Cognate of ‹hoplo‑›. See also: <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>, <a href="#hoplomachia">hoplomachía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="horkos"><i>hórkos<br/>hórkoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “oath”. A <a href="#desmos">binding</a> commitment to a <a href="#theos">god</a> until the fulfillment of the stated duty. Yoked upon a <i><a href="#hiereus">hiereús</a> </i>during their <a href="#doulos">service</a>, and taken on by devoted laity for the span of a <a href="#hieros">sacred</a> mission. The oathbound gain <a href="#tis">some</a> small measure of <a href="#theos">divine</a> <a href="#dynamis">power</a> through their connection, aiding them in their labors. This is not without its downsides, though, once you consider <i><a href="#skia">skiaí</a>. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹exorcise›. See also: <i><a href="#megalorkia">megalorkía</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#epangelian">epangelían</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hydor"><i>hýdōr<br/>hýdata </i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hydro‑. Literally, “hydro‑”. Still more literally, “water”. Cognate of ‹hydro‑›, ‹hydr‑›; related to the cognates of ‹hydrodynamics›, ‹hydrogen›. See also: <i><a href="#klepsydra">klepsýdra</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hymnos"><i>hýmnos<br/>hýmnoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hymn. Literally, “hymn”. Still more literally, “sung in praise”. A <a href="#oide">song</a> of praise and devotion. Cognate of ‹hymn›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#skolion">skólion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hyper"><i>hypér</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hyper‑. Literally, “hyper‑”. Still more literally, “above (positionally)”, “beyond (superior to)”, “in favor of”, “in opposition to”. Cognate of ‹hyper‑›, ‹hyper›; related to the cognates of ‹hyperbole›, ‹hyperactive›, ‹hyperion›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#hypo">hypó</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypnos"><i>Hýpnos<br/>hýpnoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hypnos. Literally, “Hypnos”. Still more literally, “sleep”. The <a href="#poiesis">poets</a> personify this all-too-<a href="#physikon">natural</a> phenomenon as the twin brother of <i><a href="#thanatos">Thánatos</a>, </i>and son of <i><a href="#nyx">Nýx</a> </i>and <i><a href="#erebos">Érebos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹Hypnos›, ‹hypno‑›; related to the cognates of ‹hypnosis›, ‹hypnopompic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypo"><i>hypó</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hypo‑. Literally, “hypo‑”. Still more literally, “under (positionally/the power of/the standard)”, or “by”. Cognate of ‹hypo‑›, ‹hypo›; related to the cognates of ‹hypodermic›, ‹hypothalamus›, ‹hypothermia›. Contrast with <i><a href="#hyper">hypèr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypokorismos"><i>hypokorismós<br/>hypokorismoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hypocorism. Literally, “hypocorism”, combining <i><a href="#hypo">hypó</a>, <a href="#kouros">koûros</a>. </i>Still more literally, “under child”. A diminutive or pet name, used as a term of endearment or familiarity. It is a <a href="#genos">type</a> of <i><a href="#prosonymia">prosonymía</a> </i>based on shortening a name or otherwise simplifying its pronunciation, as in the style of baby talk. Cognate of ‹hypocorism›. See also: <i><a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypokras"><i>hypokrâs<br/>hypokrateîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hypocras. Literally, “hypocras”, combining <i><a href="#hypo">hypó</a>, <a href="#krater">kratḗr</a>. </i>Still more literally, “subtle mix”. Spiced <a href="#oinos">wine</a>, typically served warm. No relation to <i><a href="#hypokrisis">hypókrisis</a>, ‹Hippokrátēs›. </i>Cognate of ‹hypocras›, ‹hippocras›; related to the cognate of ‹krasis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypokrisis"><i>hypókrisis<br/>hypokríseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hypocrisy. Literally, “hypocrisy”, combining <i><a href="#hypo">hypó</a>, <a href="#krisis">krísis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “under judgment”, hence performance or pretense. This <a href="#lexis">word</a> once had more <a href="#oudeteron">neutral</a> connotations and referred mostly to the <a href="#theatron">stage</a>. These became more negative <a href="#epi">over</a> time, perhaps due to the rampant immorality of actors. Cognate of ‹hypocrisy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypothalassion"><i>hypothalássion<br/>hypothalássia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “under the sea”, combining <i><a href="#hypo">hypó</a>, <a href="#thalassa">thálassa</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="hypselos"><i>hypsēlós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Hypso‑. Literally, “hypso‑”, referencing <i><a href="#hyper">hypér</a>. </i> Still more literally, “high”, “lofty” or “exalted”. Specifically, in stature, status, or <a href="#pneuma">spirit</a>. Cognate of ‹hypso‑›, ‹hypsi‑›, ‹hyps‑›; related to the cognates of ‹hypsometry›, ‹hypsophobia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="iatrike"><i>iatrikḗ</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Medicine. Literally, “healing art”. Related to the cognates of ‹iatrogenic›, ‹pediatric›, ‹psychiatry›, ‹Jason›. See also: <i><a href="#paideiaarkanos">paidéia árkanos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ichor"><i>ichṓr<br/>ichṓres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ichor. Literally, “ichor”. The <a href="#theos">divine</a>, <a href="#elektron">amber</a> fluid that flows through the veins of <a href="#theos">gods</a> instead of crimson <a href="#haima">blood</a>. Cognate of ‹ichor›. See also: <i><a href="#elektron">ḗlektron</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="idiotikosereunetes"><i>idiōtikós ereunētḗs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “individual researcher”, combining <i>ídios, ereunáō. </i>A private investigator. Related to the cognates of ‹idiot›, ‹idiom›, ‹idiosyncrasy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="invocation"><i>invocation</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>For a <a href="#theos">god</a>, the <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>used alongside Their <i><a href="#etymonymon">Etymṓnymon</a> </i>in <a href="#euche">prayer</a> to specify which of Their <a href="#domain">domains</a> is relevant: the <i><a href="#epiklesis">epiklḗsis</a>. </i>For example, when <a href="#euche">praying</a> to <i><a href="#dolios">Dólios</a> </i>for a boon in trade, you would follow His <i><a href="#etymonymon">Etymṓnymon</a> </i>with <i><a href="#agoraios">Agoraîos</a>, </i>Patron of the Market.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="iota"><i>iôta</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Iota. Literally, “iota”. This <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a>, </i><a href="#morphe">shaped</a> like an iota, is the smallest in the <i><a href="#alphabetos">álphabētos</a>; </i>hence, it denotes <a href="#tis">any</a> small amount, like a jot. Cognate of ‹iota›, ‹jot›; related to the cognates of ‹i›, ‹j›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="isonantisou"><i>íson ant’ ísou</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “equal against equal”, combining <i><a href="#isos">ísos</a>, <a href="#anti">antí</a>. </i>Tit for tat, or measure for measure: an exact or fair exchange.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="isos"><i>ísos<br/>ísoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Iso‑. Literally, “iso‑”. Still more literally, “same” or “equal”. Cognate of ‹iso‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kai"><i>kaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>And. And what? Nothing: just and. Literally, “and”, and sometimes “both”. See also: <i><a href="#e">ḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kaio"><i>kaíō</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cauterize. Literally, “cauterize”. Still more literally, “burn” or “brand”. Metaphorically, also. Specifically, a way to apply a <i><a href="#stigma">stígma</a> </i>with <a href="#pyr">fire</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#kai">kaì</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹cauterize›; related to the cognates of ‹caustic›, ‹cautery›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kapeleion"><i>kapēleîon<br/>kapēleîa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “retailer place”, with the connotation of tavern or <a href="#oinos">wine</a> shop. Contrast with: <i><a href="#symposion">sympósion</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#kapelissa">kapḗlissa</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kapelissa"><i>kapḗlissa<br/>kapḗlissai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “taverness” or “female shopkeeper”, referencing <i><a href="#kapeleion">kapēleîon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kapnos"><i>kapnós<br/>kapnoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “smoke”. It accompanies <a href="#pyr">fire</a>. Related to the cognates of ‹capnograph›, ‹capnometer›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kara"><i>kára<br/>kárai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “head”, akin to <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a>. </i>The elevated, <a href="#poiesis">poetic</a> term, oft used in <i><a href="#tragoidia">tragōidía</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#kephale">kephalḗ</a>, <a href="#kardia">kardía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kardia"><i>kardía<br/>kardíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cardio‑. Literally, “cardio‑”. Still more literally, “heart”; also, metaphorically. Cognate of ‹cardio‑›; related to the cognates of ‹cardiac›, ‹cardiology›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kara">kára</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="karikatoura"><i>karikatoúra<br/>karikatoûrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Caricature. Literally, “caricature”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Cognate of ‹caricature›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="karyon"><i>káryon<br/>kárya</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “nut” or “kernel”. Related to the cognates of ‹caryopsis›, ‹caryatid›. See also: <i><a href="#anazopyrounkaryon">anazōpyroûn káryon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kata"><i>katà</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “downward”, “according to/with”, “by”, “throughout”, “against”. A preposition. No relation to ‹katas› or dogs.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kataklysmos"><i>kataklysmós<br/>kataklysmoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cataclysm. Literally, “cataclysm”, combining <i><a href="#kata">katà</a>, klýzō. </i>Still more literally, “washing over”, hence flood. Cognate of ‹cataclysm›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kataprayntikos"><i>katapraýntikós<br/>katapraýntikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “calming down”, combining <i><a href="#kata">katà</a>, praýnō, ‑tikós. </i>A depressant: <a href="#tis">any</a> soothing or sedating <i><a href="#pharmakon">phármakon</a>, </i>such as <i><a href="#kykeon">kykeṓn</a>, <a href="#opion">ópion</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#egeiron">egeírōn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="katharmos"><i>kátharmos<br/>kátharmoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Catharsis. Literally, “catharsis”. A purging, purification, or cleansing, whether spiritual or literal. Ideally, by <a href="#pyr">fire</a> or <a href="#kataklysmos">flood</a>, though I suppose that sometimes scrubbing with soap and water will do. Cognate of ‹catharsis›. See also: <i><a href="#miasma">míasma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keleustes"><i>keleustḗs<br/>keleustaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “commander”. Specifically, coxswain or rowing <a href="#despotes">master</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kenon"><i>kenón<br/>kená</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “void” or “emptiness”. What remains when <a href="#pas">all</a> else is removed, hence <a href="#olethros">indestructible</a>. Nature abhors it, yet it persists. No relation to ‹Barbie›. Related to the cognate of ‹kenosis›, ‹keno›, ‹cenotaph›. See also: <i><a href="#ontologia">ontología</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#ousia">ousía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kephale"><i>kephalḗ<br/>kephalái</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cephalo‑. Literally, “cephalo‑”, akin to <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a>. </i>Still more literally, “head”; also metaphorically. The term used in common prose. Cognate of ‹cephalo‑›, ‹cephal‑›; related to the cognates of ‹cephalic›, ‹cephalopod›, ‹capital›, ‹head›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kara">kára</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kepostonmnemoneumatonmou"><i>kḗpos tôn mnēmoneumátōn mou</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “garden of my remembrances”, referencing <i>kḗpos, <a href="#tes">tôn</a>, <a href="#mneme">mnḗmē</a>, mou. </i>See also: <i><a href="#hemitheos">hēmítheos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ker"><i>kêr<br/>kêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ker. Literally, “ker”. Still more literally, “death” or “destruction”. A <a href="#pneuma">spirit</a> of <a href="#thanatos">death</a>, considered <a href="#theleia">female</a>. No relation to ‹Kur›. Cognate of ‹ker›. See: <i><a href="#daimonogonos">daimonógonos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keramike"><i>keramikḗ<br/>keramikà</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ceramics. Literal, “ceramics” or “pottery”, referencing <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a> </i>based on being as hard as <a href="#keras">horn</a>. Cognate of ‹ceramics›. See also: <i><a href="#amphoreus">amphoreús</a>, <a href="#kyathos">kyathos</a>, <a href="#kylix">kýlix</a>, <a href="#krater">kratḗr</a>, <a href="#oinochoe">oinochóē</a>, <a href="#pithos">píthos</a>, <a href="#skyphos">skýphos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keras"><i>kéras<br/>kérata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “horn”. No relation to <i><a href="#keros">kērós</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹keratin›, ‹ceratoid›, ‹monocerate›, ‹triceratops›, and to <i><a href="#keraunos">keraunós</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#kerastesplethoras">kéras tēs plēthṓras</a>, <a href="#kara">kára</a>, <a href="#keramike">keramikḗ</a>, <a href="#kranion">kraníon</a>, <a href="#kranos">krános</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kerastesplethoras"><i>kéras tēs plēthṓras</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “horn of plenty”, combining <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a>, <a href="#tes">tēs</a>, <a href="#plethora">plēthṓra</a>, </i>hence the cornucopia. A traditional symbol of abundance.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keraunos"><i>keraunós<br/>keraunoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “thunderbolt”. Oft understood as <i><a href="#theonkeraunos">theôn keraunoí</a>, </i>the jagged <a href="#dory">spears</a> of the <a href="#theos">gods</a>, though sometimes it’s just weather. No relation to <i><a href="#elektron">ḗlektron</a>. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹keraunophobia›, and to <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kerkouros"><i>kerkoûros<br/>kerkoûroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “tail-tailed”, combining <i>kérkos, ourá, </i>referring to its long tail. A <a href="#genos">type</a> of small, fast <a href="#emporos">merchant</a> ship. Related to the cognates of ‹cercal›, ‹Cercopia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keropinax"><i>kēropínax<br/>kēropínakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “wax tablet”, combining <i><a href="#keros">kērós</a>, <a href="#pinax">pínax</a>. </i>A wooden frame layered with <a href="#keros">wax</a>, it is the ubiquitous reusable surface for notes, calculations, and temporary writing. Paired with <i><a href="#graphis">graphídes</a>, </i><a href="#megas">larger</a> <a href="#heis">ones</a> tend to be rectangular while smaller <a href="#heis">ones</a> are conveniently <a href="#trigonon">triangular</a> or at least acutely <a href="#trapeza">trapezoidal</a>; the <a href="#megas">largest</a> are wall-mounted <a href="#pinax">boards</a>. Related to the cognates of ‹cerumen›, ‹cere›. See also: <i><a href="#deltos">déltos</a>, <a href="#deltion">deltíon</a>, <a href="#megalokeropinax">megalokēropínax</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keros"><i>kērós<br/>kēroí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “wax”. Typically, though not always, <i><a href="#melikeron">melíkēron</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹cerate›, ‹cerumen›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="keryx"><i>kḗryx<br/>kḗrykes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “herald”, “messenger”, or “public announcer”. Related to the cognates of ‹kerygma›, ‹caduceus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kinesis"><i>kínēsis<br/>kinḗseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kinesis. Literally, “kinesis”. Still more literally, “motion”. Cognate of ‹kinesis›. See also: <i><a href="#telekinesis">tēlekínēsis</a>, <a href="#pyrokinesis">pyrokínēsis</a>, <a href="#antiheliokinetikos">antiheliokinētikós</a>, <a href="#heliokinetikos">heliokinētikós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kithara"><i>kithára<br/>kithárai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kithara. Literally, “kithara”. A <a href="#genos">type</a> of <a href="#megas">large</a>, complex <i><a href="#lyra">lýra</a> </i>with a box-<a href="#morphe">shaped</a> resonator, straight arms, and a flat base; played, with a <i><a href="#plektron">plēktron</a>, </i>by professional <i><a href="#mousikos">mousikoí</a> </i>called <i><a href="#kitharistes">kitharistaí</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹kithara›, ‹cithara›, ‹zither›; related to the cognates of ‹guitar›, ‹gittern›, ‹cittern›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kitharistes"><i>kitharistēs<br/>kitharistaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kitharist. Literally, “kitharist”. A skilled, professional <i><a href="#mousikos">mousikós</a> </i>who sings while playing the <i><a href="#kithara">kithára</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹kitharist›, ‹citharist›, ‹citharode›, ‹kitharode›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kitron"><i>kítron<br/>kítra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Citron. Literally, “citron”. Refers to any of the various varieties of citruses, <a href="#tis">some</a> <a href="#glykys">sweeter</a>, <a href="#tis">some</a> sourer. Cognate of ‹citron›; related to the cognate of ‹citrus›. See also: <a href="#chrysomelon">chrȳsómēlon</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="klepsydra"><i>klepsýdra<br/>klepsýdrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Clepsydra. Literally, “clepsydra”, combining <i><a href="#klepto">kléptō</a>, <a href="#hydor">hýdōr</a>. </i>Still more literally, “water thief”. An elegant timekeeping device based upon the regulated flow of water, oft used to impose a limit upon the duration of an activity that would otherwise task our patience and profit, whether it is a speech in court or the use of a <i><a href="#porne">pórnē</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹clepsydra›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="klepto"><i>kléptō<br/>kléptomen</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Klepto‑. Literally, “klepto‑”. Still more literally, “steal”, “thieve”. Cognate of ‹klepto‑›, ‹klepto›; related to the cognate of ‹kleptocracy›, ‹kleptomania›. See also: <i><a href="#klepsydra">klepsýdra</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="klibanos"><i>klíbanos<br/>klíbanoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Clibanus. Literally, “clibanus”. An oven or Dutch oven. Sometimes small and owned by a <a href="#monos">single</a> <i><a href="#oikos">oîkos</a>, </i>though <a href="#megas">larger</a> <a href="#heis">ones</a> are shared by neighbors or even available at the <i><a href="#agora">agorā́</a> </i>for public use. Cognate of ‹clibanus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="knemis"><i>knēmís<br/>knēmídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cnemis. Literally, “cnemis”. Still more literally, “shin”. Specifically, a greave: a shin <a href="#phylax">guard</a>. Wrought from <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> and lined with cloth, they are custom-fitted to the <a href="#hoplites">soldier</a> and usually stay in place without straps, covering the front of the leg from knee to ankle. An essential part of the <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a> </i>of the <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>, </i><a href="#prostates">protecting</a> what the <a href="#aspis">shield</a> cannot. Only a <a href="#moron">fool</a> goes into <a href="#machetes">battle</a> without <a href="#heis">one</a>, and such a <a href="#moron">fool</a> deserves to <a href="#thanatos">die</a>. Cognate of ‹cnemis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kochliarion"><i>kochliárion<br/>kochliária</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “small spiral” or “small snail”, referring the curved <a href="#morphe">shape</a> of a spoon or small ladle. Along with a <a href="#spathe">knife</a>, what more could you ask for? A tiny trident?<i>! </i>Don’t be absurd. Related to the cognate of ‹cochlea›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="koinodialektos"><i>koinodiálektos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “common dialect”. The common <i><a href="#glossa">glôssa</a> </i>ever since the <a href="#chryseosaion">Golden Age</a>. Pure and unadulterated, unlike ‹Greek›, or even ‹Koine›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kome"><i>kṓmē<br/>kṓmai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “village”. See also: <i><a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="komoidia"><i>kōmōidía<br/>kōmōidíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Comedy. Literally, “comedy”, combining <i><a href="#kome">kṓmai</a>, <a href="#oide">ōidḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “revelry song” or “festival song”. Even more literally, “village song”, referencing the drunken revelry of rural <a href="#heorte">festivals</a>. A light <i><a href="#drama">drâma</a> </i>about terrible events causing <a href="#anthropos">human</a> suffering, evoking amusement and laughter. Essentially, the same thing as <i><a href="#tragoidia">tragōidía</a>, </i>except it’s happening to a different <a href="#prosopon">person</a>: <a href="#tis">one</a> for whom you have <i><a href="#empatheia">empátheia</a> </i>without <i><a href="#sympatheia">sympátheia</a>. </i>No relation to ‹commode›. Cognate of ‹comedy›. For stock characters, see: <i><a href="#alazon">alazṓn</a>, <a href="#bomolochos">bōmolóchos</a>, <a href="#eiron">eírōn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="konarion"><i>kōnárion<br/>kōnária</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cone. Literally, “cone”. Still more literally, “small pyramid” or “pinecone”. Specifically, the pineal gland, <a href="#morphe">shaped</a> like a pinecone, hence its name. Deep within the <a href="#kranion">skull</a>, it is where <a href="#psyche">soul</a> meets <a href="#soma">body</a>, anchoring the <a href="#nous">mind</a> to the brain. And so it is within this <i><a href="#pyramis">pyramís</a> </i>that <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a> </i>is focused and the <a href="#theophthalmes">godseye</a> is rooted, capturing the very <a href="#zoe">lively</a> and <a href="#hagia">pure</a> <a href="#phlox">flame</a>. Cognate of ‹cone›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="konia"><i>konía<br/>koníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Konio‑. Literally, “konio‑”. Still more literally, “dust” or “powder”. Cognate of ‹konio‑›, ‹conio‑›; Related to the cognates of ‹koniology›, ‹coniology›, ‹koniosis›, ‹coniosis›, ‹koniophage›, ‹coniophage›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kopelates"><i>kōpēlátēs<br/>kōpēlátai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “oarsman”. Still more literally, “oar driver”. Related to the cognate of ‹elastic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kopis"><i>kopís<br/>kopídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kopis. Literally, “kopis”. Still more literally, “chopper”. The <a href="#xiphos">sword</a> features a <a href="#monos">single</a> edge and a pronounced forward curve. While designed for <a href="#amphi">both</a> cutting and thrusting, it excels at slashing, making it ideal for heavy and shock cavalry. It is the longer, recurved version of the <i><a href="#makhaira">mákhaira</a>. </i>No relation to ‹khopesh›. Cognate of ‹kopis›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#spathe">spáthē</a>, <a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="korax"><i>kórax<br/>kórakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Corax. Literally, “corax”. Still more literally, “corvid”. Traditionally, a <a href="#theos">divine</a> <i><a href="#angelos">ángelos</a>, </i>for while neither the crow nor raven fly as fast as the <i><a href="#hierax">hiérax</a>, </i>they take the straight path and deliver Their message by <a href="#phone">speaking</a>. Cognate of ‹corax›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kore"><i>kórē<br/>kórai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>
Kore. Literally, “kore”. Still more literally, “young woman”. Notably, refers also to a traditional <a href="#morphe">form</a> of <a href="#glypton">sculpture</a> depicting the <i><a href="#theleia">thḗleia</a> </i>youthful beauty and <a href="#katharmos">purity</a> of this subject. The <a href="#glypton">statue</a> is <a href="#zoe">life</a>-sized, free-standing, and painted in <i><a href="#polychromos">polýchrōmos</a>. </i>It portrays the elegantly-dressed <a href="#partheneia">maiden</a> with intricately-styled hair, her legs modestly together, and <a href="#phoros">bearing</a> an enigmatic <a href="#archaicsmile">archaic smile</a>. No relation to ‹core›. Related to <i><a href="#kouros">koûros</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹kore›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kosmomphalos"><i>Kosmomphalós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “world’s navel”, combining <i><a href="#kosmos">kósmos</a>, omphalós. </i>An <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>of <i><a href="#olympos">Ólympos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kosmos"><i>kósmos<br/>kósmoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cosmos. Literally, “cosmos”. Still more literally, “world” or “universe”. Even more literally, “arrangement” or “order”. Cognate of ‹cosmos›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kottabos"><i>kóttabos<br/>kóttaboi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kottabos. Literally, “kottabos”. A drinking <a href="#agon">game</a> popular at <i><a href="#symposion">sympósia</a>, </i>played by flinging the dregs onto a target; of which there are <a href="#poly">many</a> varieties, allowing <a href="#poly">many</a> sets of rules. A <a href="#agon">game</a> of skill as much as chance, and — <a href="#epi">over</a> the course of the <a href="#nyx">night</a> — a test of how <a href="#eu">well</a> <a href="#tis">one</a> holds their <a href="#poton">drink</a>. Cognate of ‹kottabos›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="koukoulion"><i>koukoúlion<br/>koukoúlia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cucullus. Literally, “cucullus”. Still more literally, “cowl” or “hooded cloak”. Cognate of ‹cucullus›, ‹cowl›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kouros"><i>koûros<br/>koûroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kouros. Literally, “kouros”. Still more literally, “young man”. Notably, refers also to a traditional <a href="#morphe">form</a> of <a href="#glypton">sculpture</a> depicting the <i><a href="#arsenikos">arsenikós</a> </i>youthful vigor and athleticism of this subject. The <a href="#glypton">statue</a> is <a href="#zoe">life</a>-sized, free-standing, and painted in <i><a href="#polychromos">polýchrōmos</a>. </i>It portrays the nude youth in a stiff pose with his left leg forward, and <a href="#phoros">bearing</a> an enigmatic <a href="#archaicsmile">archaic smile</a>. Oft used as a grave marking or an offering to the <a href="#theos">gods</a>. Related to <i><a href="#kore">kórē</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹kouros›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kranion"><i>kraníon<br/>kranía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cranium. Literally, “cranium”, referencing <i><a href="#kranos">krános</a>. </i>Still more literally, “little helmet”, hence skull. Cognate of ‹cranium›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kranos"><i>krános<br/>kránē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “helmet”, akin to <i><a href="#keras">kéras</a>. </i>Wrought of <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a>, it traditionally covers the cheeks and <a href="#rhis">nose</a> in the style of ‹Magneto›, although <a href="#neos">newer</a> designs <a href="#sophia">unwisely</a> expose more of the <a href="#prosopon">face</a> in an attempt to improve <a href="#opsis">sight</a> and hearing. An absolutely essential part of the <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a> </i>of the <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>. </i>Only a <a href="#moron">fool</a> goes into <a href="#machetes">battle</a> without <a href="#heis">one</a>, and such a <a href="#moron">fool</a> deserves to <a href="#thanatos">die</a>. See also: <i><a href="#kranion">kraníon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="krater"><i>kratḗr<br/>kratêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Krater. Literally, “krater”. Still more literally, “mixing vessel”. This decanter is a jar or vase, usually <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>and oft decorated elaborately, with a <a href="#megas">large</a> round <a href="#soma">body</a> and wide mouth for diluting <a href="#oinos">wine</a>, as is customary among civilized <a href="#prosopon">individuals</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹krater›, ‹crater›, ‹crasis›. See also: <i><a href="#akratos">ákratos</a>, <a href="#kyathos">kýathos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kratos"><i>krátos<br/>krátē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “strength”, “power”, or “authority”, whether <a href="#physikon">physical</a> or <a href="#polis">political</a>. This is the active sense of power: as exerted authority. See also: <i><a href="#akrates">akratḗs</a>, <a href="#aristokratia">aristokratía</a>, <a href="#autokratia">autokratía</a>, <a href="#demokratia">dēmokratía</a>, <a href="#theokratia">theokratíā</a>, <a href="#pankration">pankrátion</a>, <a href="#pantokrator">pantokrátōr</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#dynamis">dýnamis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="krino"><i>krínō</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “to judge”. Still more literally, “to distinguish, or decide”. Related to the cognates of ‹critic›, ‹criteria›, ‹crisis›, ‹discriminate›. See also: <i><a href="#krisis">krísis</a>, <a href="#krites">kritḗs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="krisis"><i>krísis<br/>kríseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Crisis. Literally, “crisis”, referencing <i><a href="#krino">krínō</a>. </i>Still more literally, “judgment”, “decision”. Not always the end of the <a href="#kosmos">world</a>, much less infinite <a href="#heis">ones</a>. Cognate of ‹crisis›. See also: <i><a href="#hypokrisis">hypókrisis</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#ekloge">eklogḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="krites"><i>kritḗs<br/>kritaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Critic. Literally, “critic”. Still more literally, “judge”, referencing <i><a href="#krino">krínō</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹critic›; related to the cognates of ‹criteria›, ‹crisis›, ‹discriminate›. See also: <i><a href="#themistokrites">themistokrítēs</a>, <a href="#hypokrisis">hypókrisis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kryptos"><i>kryptós<br/>kryptoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cryptic. Literally, “cryptic”. Still more literally, “hidden” or “concealed”. Neither a <i><a href="#planetes">planḗtēs</a> </i>nor a dog. Cognate of ‹cryptic›; related to the cognate of ‹krypton›, ‹Krypton›, ‹kryptonite›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#aletheia">alḗtheia</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#apokalypsis">apokálypsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ktonos"><i>któnos<br/>któnoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>‑Ctonus. Literally, “‑ctonus”. Still more literally, “slayer”, “slaughterer”, or “killer”. The more specific term, oft used as a suffix, akin to ‹‑cide›. Cognate of ‹‑ctonus›; related to the cognates of ‹ktenology›, ‹Androctonus›. See also: <i><a href="#theoktonos">theoktónos</a>, <a href="#pantheoouranoktonos">pantheoouranoktónos</a>, <a href="#doryphoroktonon">Doryphoroktónon</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#phonos">phónos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kyathos"><i>kýathos<br/>kýathoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kyathos. Literally, “kyathos”. Still more literally, “hollowed”. A long-handled <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>cup or ladle, used to fill a <i><a href="#kylix">kýlix</a> </i>from a <i><a href="#krater">kratḗr</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹kyathos›, ‹cyathus›, ‹cyatho‑›, ‹cyath‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kybernetes"><i>kybernḗtēs<br/>kybernêtai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cybernetist. Literally, “cybernetist”. Still more literally, “gubernator”, “governor”, “steersman”. Specifically, helmsman or pilot. No relation to ‹Khyber› or online sex, I think. Cognate of ‹cybernetist›, ‹gubernator›, ‹governor›; related to the cognates of ‹Kubernetes›, ‹cyber›, ‹cyber‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kykeon"><i>kykeṓn<br/>kykeônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kykeon. Literally, “kykeon”. Still more literally, “mixture” or “stirred”, though not shaken. A drink <a href="#poiesis">made</a> from barley and water, oft with <a href="#meli">honey</a> and relaxing herbs. When used <a href="#telete">ceremonially</a> in <i><a href="#mysterion">mystēria</a>, </i>the barley is enhanced by ergot. Cognate of ‹kykeon›. See also: <i><a href="#kataprayntikos">katapraýntikós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kylix"><i>kýlix<br/>kýlikes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Kylix. Literally, “kylix”. Still more literally, “turned” or “spun”, referring to how the clay is <a href="#morphe">formed</a>. A shallow <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>goblet with looped handles on either side, resting on a slender, elevated base. Even the cheapest are decorated elaborately, <a href="#amphi">both</a> inside and out. Cognate of ‹kylix›, ‹cylix›. See also: <i><a href="#skyphos">skýphos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kyttaron"><i>kýttaron<br/>kýttara</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cyto‑. Literally, “cyto‑”. Still more literally, “small container”. The imperceptibly tiny, roomlike <a href="#tektaino">building</a> block of the <a href="#sarx">flesh</a>: the cell. Cognate of ‹cyto‑›; related to the cognate of ‹cytoplasm›. See also: <i><a href="#chromosoma">chromosṓmata</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="kyttaropsis"><i>kyttarópsis<br/>kyttarópseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Cytoscopy. Literally, “cytoscopy”, combining <i><a href="#kyttaron">kýttaron</a>, <a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “cell sight”. Microscopic <a href="#opsis">vision</a>, allowing <a href="#tis">one</a> to see the <i><a href="#kyttaron">kýttara</a>, </i>even unto the <i><a href="#chromosoma">chromosṓmata</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹cytoscopy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="labrys"><i>lábrys<br/>lábrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Labrys. Literally, “labrys”. An ornate <a href="#dyo">double</a>-<a href="#kephale">headed</a> axe. Cognate of ‹labrys›; related to the cognate of ‹labyrinth›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lampros"><i>lamprós<br/>lamproí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “bright”, “glorious”, “shining”, “radiant”, “clear”. Can refer also to <a href="#phlox">flame</a>. Cognate of ‹lamp›, ‹lantern›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="laos"><i>laós<br/>laoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “people”, “subjects”. So broad that—outside of a military context, where it refers to the host—it includes <a href="#gyne">women</a>, <a href="#pais">children</a>, and <a href="#doulos">slaves</a>. No relation to ‹Laos›, ‹Lajos›. Related to the cognate of ‹laity›. See also: <a href="#people">people</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="leon"><i>léōn<br/>léontes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lion. Literally, “lion”. An <i><a href="#ailouros">aílouros</a> </i>of unusual size. No relation to ‹Donatello›, ‹Michelangelo›, ‹Raphael›. Cognate of ‹lion›, ‹leon‑›, ‹‑leon›; related to the cognates of ‹leonine›, ‹leonid›, ‹Leo›, ‹Leon›, ‹Leonid›, ‹Leonard›, ‹Leonardo›, <i>‹Leōnídas›.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lepton"><i>leptón<br/>leptá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lepton. Literally, “lepton”. Still more literally, “small”. The smallest <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> minted, a thin disc of <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> worth an 8<span class="superscript">th </span>of a <i><a href="#chalkous">chalkoûs</a>, </i>hence a 384<span class="superscript">th </span>of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹lepton›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lestes"><i>lēstḗs<br/>lēstaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “plunderer” or “looter”. A robber, bandit, or <a href="#klepto">thief</a>. May be a brigand stalking a trade road, a <i><a href="#peirates">peiratḗs</a> </i>on the high <a href="#pontos">seas</a>, or — in more urban settings — a mugger or common street thug. No relation to ‹Lestat›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lethe"><i>lḗthē<br/>lêthai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lethe. Literally, “lethe”. Still more literally, “oblivion”, “forgetfulness”, “concealment”. Like a river that <a href="#kataklysmos">washes away</a> your <a href="#mneme">memory</a>. No relation to ‹lethal›. Cognate of ‹lethe›; related to the cognate of ‹lethargy› See also: <i><a href="#mneme">mnḗmē</a>, <a href="#aletheia">alḗtheia</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lexis"><i>léxis<br/>léxeis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lexis. Literally, “lexis”. Still more literally, “word”, and therefore <a href="#phone">speech</a>, diction, or the stylistic and rhetorical <a href="#krisis">choices</a> made in this regard. Collectively, the words in a <a href="#glossa">language</a> or the vocabulary of a <a href="#ethnos">people</a>. Cognate of ‹lexis›; related to the cognate of ‹lexicon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="linothorax"><i>linothṓrax<br/>linothṓrakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Linothorax. Literally, “linothorax”, combining <i>línon, <a href="#thorax">thṓrax</a>. </i>Still more literally, “linen breastplate”. Chest armor <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of layers of linen <a href="#desmos">bound</a> together, rivaling the <a href="#prostates">protection</a> of <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> while allowing more mobility, hence an alternative part of the <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a> </i>of the <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>. </i>It follows a tube and yoke design, encasing the torso and extending <a href="#epi">over</a> the shoulders, oft augmented by additional <a href="#prostates">protective</a> parts. Cognate of ‹linothorax›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lithos"><i>líthos<br/>líthoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lithic. Literally, “lithic”. Still more literally, “stone” or “rock”, oft with the connotation of a monument. Cognate of ‹lithic›, ‹‑lith›; related to the cognates of ‹neolithic›, ‹lithium›, ‹megalith›. See also: <i><a href="#akrolithos">akrólithos</a>, <a href="#hestiaslithos">Hestías Líthos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="logike"><i>logikḗ<br/>logikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Logic. Literally, “logic”. Still more literally, “study of reasoning”. Cognate of ‹logic›, ‹‑logy›. See also: <a href="#threeliteracies">three literacies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="love"><i>love</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>That most complex of <a href="#pathos">emotions</a>, and the very thing that makes <a href="#bios">life</a> worthwhile. In a civilized <a href="#glossa">language</a>, too vast a <a href="#ennoia">concept</a> for <a href="#tis">any</a> <a href="#monos">single</a> <a href="#lexis">word</a> to pretend to encompass. See: <i><a href="#agape">agápē</a>, <a href="#eros">érōs</a>, <a href="#philia">philíā</a>, <a href="#storge">storgḗ</a>, <a href="#philostorgos">philóstorgos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lykos"><i>lýkos<br/>lýkoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lyco‑. Literally, “lyco‑”. Still more literally, “wolf”. No relation to light, I think. Cognate of ‹lyco›, ‹lyc-›; related to the cognates of ‹lycanthrope›, ‹lycopodium›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lyra"><i>lýra<br/>lýrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Lyre. Literally, “lyre”. Cognate of ‹lyre›; related to the cognate of ‹lyrics›. See also: <i><a href="#kithara">kithára</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="lytro"><i>Lýtrō</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A <i><a href="#doulos">doûlos</a> </i>of little importance: handsome yet <a href="#lethe">forgettable</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="machetes"><i>machētḗs<br/>machētaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fighter”. Related to <i><a href="#hoplomachia">hoplomachía</a>, <a href="#makhaira">mákhaira</a>. </i>No relation to ‹machete›, ‹macho›, ‹macchiato›. See also: <i><a href="#hoplomachia">hoplomachía</a>, <a href="#pygme">pygmḗ</a>, <a href="#pale">pálē</a>, <a href="#pankration">pankrátion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mageia"><i>mageía<br/>mageíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Magic. Literally, “magic”. Contrary to the <i><a href="#aphorismos">aphorismós</a>, </i>it never goes away. Cognate of ‹magic›. See also: <i><a href="#arkanon">árkana</a>, <a href="#alexikakon">alexíkaka</a>, <a href="#goeteia">goēteía</a>, <a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>, <a href="#thauma">thaûma</a>, <a href="#phantasia">phantasía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mageiophagos"><i>mageiophágos<br/>mageiophágoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “magic-eating”, combining <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>, <a href="#phagos">phagós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mageiros"><i>mágeiros<br/>mágeiroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mageiros. Literally, “mageiros”. Still more literally, “cook” and “butcher”, combined. No relation to <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>, </i>even when the food seems <a href="#metaphysikon">supernaturally</a> delicious, like <i><a href="#baklavas">baklavás</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹mageiros›, ‹magirist›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="magma"><i>mágma<br/>mágmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Magma. Literally, “magma”. Still more literally, “kneaded” or “mixed”. A thick paste, such as molten <a href="#lithos">rock</a>. Cognate of ‹magma›; related to the cognate of ‹mass›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="makhaira"><i>mákhaira<br/>mákhairai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Makhaira. Literally, “makhaira”. Still more literally, “(fighting) knife”, referencing <i><a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>. </i>A dirk or short <a href="#xiphos">sword</a>, typically straight and <a href="#monos">single</a>-edged: ideal for close combat. The <i><a href="#kopis">kopís</a> </i>is the longer, recurved version. Cognate of ‹makhaira›, ‹machaira›, ‹machaera›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mania"><i>maníā<br/>maníāi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mania. Literally, “mania”. Still more literally, “rage” or “madness”. Sometimes <a href="#theos">divine</a> inspiration, other times, simply having a bad <a href="#hemera">day</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹mania›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="manna"><i>mánna</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Manna. Literally, “manna”. Still more literally, “what (is it?)”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. The food of the <a href="#theos">gods</a>, fueled by the <a href="#dynamis">power</a> of <a href="#thelesis">will</a>, it underlies <a href="#pas">all</a> <i><a href="#mageia">mageíai</a>. </i>Sweet and searing — like <a href="#meli">honey</a> <a href="#phlox">aflame</a> — it is <i><a href="#ambrosia">ambrosía</a> </i>and thus <i><a href="#nektar">néktar</a>. </i>No relation to the homophone, ‹mana›, even though it refers also to a spiritual energy of <a href="#tis">some</a> sort. Cognate of ‹manna›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="manteia"><i>manteía<br/>manteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mantic. Literally, “mantic”. Still more literally, “divination” or “prophecy”. Even more literally, “thinking”. The attempt to acquire <a href="#gnosis">knowledge</a> from the <a href="#nekros">dead</a> or from the <a href="#theos">gods</a> or from <a href="#thanatos">dead</a> <a href="#theos">gods</a>, depending. No relation to ‹romantic›, ‹semantic›. Cognate of ‹mantic›, ‹‑mantic›, ‹‑mancy›; related to the cognates of ‹mantis›, ‹pyromancy›. See also: <i><a href="#astragalomanteia">astragalomanteía</a>, <a href="#astromanteia">astromanteía</a>, <a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>, <a href="#pseudomanteia">pseudomanteía</a>, <a href="#pyromanteia">pyromanteía</a>, <a href="#hepatoskopia">hēpatoskopía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mantichoras"><i>mantichóras<br/>mantichórai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Manticore. Literally, “manticore”. Still more literally, “man-eater”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. A monstrous <i><a href="#chimaira">chímaira</a> </i>composed of a particularly improbable mixture of <a href="#ther">animal</a> and <a href="#anthropos">human</a> parts, yet no less <a href="#thanatos">deadly</a> for being ridiculous. Cognate of ‹manticore›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mathematikon"><i>mathēmatikón<br/>mathēmatiká</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mathematics. Literally, “mathematics”. Still more literally, “study of knowledge”. Cognate of ‹mathematics›. See also: <a href="#fournumeracies">four numeracies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="medeiarion"><i>Mēdeiárion</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “little schemer”. The <i><a href="#hypokorismos">hypokorismós</a> </i>of a silly <a href="#pais">girl</a>, a jealous <a href="#gyne">wife</a>, and — briefly — a terrible <a href="#meter">mother</a>. She is long gone, so let us never <a href="#phone">speak</a> of her again<i>! </i>Where did you even hear that name? I’m sure I never mentioned it.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="megalokeropinax"><i>megalokēropínax<br/>megalokēropínakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “great wax tablet”, combining <i><a href="#megas">mégas</a>, <a href="#keropinax">kēropínax</a>. </i>A <a href="#megas">large</a> <a href="#keros">wax</a> <a href="#pinax">board</a>, typically wall-mounted and used in <a href="#paideia">education</a>. Few objects are more terrifying.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="megalomyoxiphophoros"><i>megalomyoxiphophóros<br/>megalomyoxiphophóroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “great mouse, bearing sword”, combining <i><a href="#megas">mégas</a>, <a href="#mys">mŷs</a>, <a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>, <a href="#phoros">phóros</a>. </i>Still more literally, “sword-wielding rat”. Monstrous <i><a href="#chimaira">chímaira</a> </i>with a <a href="#mys">murine</a> body of near-<a href="#anthropos">human</a> proportions. It is cunning and cruel and <a href="#hoplon">armed</a> with opposable thumbs, not to mention the <a href="#eponymos">eponymous</a> <a href="#xiphos">sword</a>. Just to be clear, this is a <a href="#megas">great</a> <a href="#mys">mouse</a> <a href="#phoros">bearing</a> a <a href="#xiphos">sword</a>, not a <a href="#megas">great</a> <a href="#xiphos">sword</a> <a href="#phoros">bearing</a> a <a href="#mys">mouse</a>. The <a href="#xiphos">sword</a> itself of normal proportions, although admirably pointy.  No relation to ‹Mxyzptlk›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="megalorkia"><i>megalorkía<br/>megalorkíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “great oath”, combining <i><a href="#megas">mégas</a>, <a href="#horkos">hórkos</a>. </i>An unbreakable geas that constrains behavior, indenturing the subject to the grave and beyond until their mission is <a href="#pas">complete</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="megas"><i>mégas<br/>megáloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mega. Literally, “mega”. Still more literally, “big”, “great”, “large”. Cognate of ‹mega›, ‹mega‑›, ‹megalo‑›, ‹meg‑›; related to the cognates of ‹megalomania›, ‹Megatron›. See also: <i><a href="#megalokeropinax">megalokēropínax</a>, <a href="#megalorkia">megalorkía</a>, <a href="#omega">ô méga</a>, <a href="#titanikos">titanikós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="meli"><i>méli<br/>mélia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “honey”. <a href="#glykys">Sweet</a> like <a href="#sakcharon">sugar</a>, only better. Related to the cognates of ‹mellifluous›, ‹melliferous›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="melikeron"><i>melíkēron<br/>melíkēra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “honeycomb” or “beeswax”, combining <i><a href="#meli">méli</a>, <a href="#keros">kērós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “<a href="#meli">honey</a>-<a href="#keros">wax</a>”.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="melissa"><i>mélissa<br/>mélissai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “honeybee”, referencing <i><a href="#meli">méli</a>. </i>Refers metaphorically also to <a href="#hiereia">priestesses</a>, <a href="#poiesis">poets</a>, and <a href="#katharmos">pure</a> <a href="#gyne">women</a>. Cognate of ‹Melissa›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mesembria"><i>mesēmbría<br/>mesēmbríai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “midday”, combining <i>mésos, <a href="#hemera">hēméra</a>. </i>A liminal time of day, in the dead stillness of noon, when foul spirits roam freely and the wise stay indoors. Can also refer to the south, for obvious reasons. See also: <a href="#times">times</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="meta"><i>metá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Meta. Literally, “meta”. Still more literally, “with”, “after”, or “change”. No relation to ‹Facebook›. Cognate of ‹meta›, ‹meta‑›; related to the cognates of ‹metastasize›, ‹metabolism›. See also: <i><a href="#metaboloepitome">metaboloepitomḗ</a>, <a href="#metamorphosis">metamórphōsis</a>, <a href="#metaphysikon">metaphysikón</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#stasis">stásis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metaboloepitome"><i>metaboloepitomḗ<br/>metaboloepitomaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “change digest”, from “metabolic epitome”, hence <i>metabállō, epitémnō, </i>combining <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, bállō, <a href="#epi">epí</a>, témnō. </i>A summary of <a href="#meta">changes</a>, cumulatively recording <a href="#pas">all</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#delta">délta</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metallon"><i>métallon<br/>métalla</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Metal. Literally, “metal”, referencing <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, </i>though with <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. Still more literally, “after another”, referring to mines and quarries. The metal, the mine, and the act of mining the metal. Of particular significance because, unlike so much else, it persists <a href="#epi">over</a> the millennia. Cognate of ‹metal›, ‹metallo‑›, ‹metall‑›. See also: <i><a href="#metallourgia">metallourgía</a>, <a href="#alouminio">aloumínio</a>, <a href="#argyros">árgyros</a>, <a href="#chalkos">chalkós</a>, <a href="#chrysos">chrȳsós</a>, <a href="#elektron">ḗlektron</a>, <a href="#sideros">síderos</a>, <a href="#molybdos">mólybdos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metallourgia"><i>metallourgía<br/>metallourgíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Metallurgy. Literally, “metallurgy”, referencing <i><a href="#metallon">métallon</a>. </i>Still more literally, “metalworking”. Cognate of ‹metallurgy›; related to the cognate of <i><a href="#argon">árgon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metamorphosis"><i>metamórphōsis<br/>metamorphṓseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Metamorphosis. Literally, “metamorphosis”, combining <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, <a href="#morphe">morphḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “changing shape process”. The act of altering the <i><a href="#etymomorphe">etymomorphḗ</a> </i>of the <a href="#soma">body</a> down to the level of the <i><a href="#chromosoma">chromosṓmata</a> </i>in a <a href="#drama">dramatic</a> and irreversible transformation. As significant as <a href="#gonos">childbirth</a>, and nearly as painful. Cognate of ‹metamorphosis›; related to the cognate of ‹Metamorpho›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#polymorphosis">polymórphōsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metaphysikon"><i>metaphysikón<br/>metaphysiká</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Metaphysics. Literally, “metaphysics”, combining <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, <a href="#physikon">physikà</a>. </i>Still more literally, “beyond natural”, hence supernatural. Rather arbitrarily encompasses <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a> </i>while excluding <i><a href="#physikon">physikà</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹metaphysics›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="meter"><i>mḗtēr<br/>mētéres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mater. Literally, “mater”. Still more literally, “mother”. A job both trivially easy and impossibly difficult, depending. No relation to ‹meter›. Cognate of ‹mother›, ‹mater›, ‹matri‑›, ‹matro‑›, ‹matr‑›; related to the cognates of ‹matrimony›, ‹matrix›. See also: <i><a href="#theometer">theomḗtēr</a>, <a href="#goneus">goneús</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#pater">patḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="methodos"><i>méthodos<br/>méthodoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Method. Literally, “method”, combining <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, hodós. </i>Still more literally, “following the path”. Cognate of ‹method›; related to the cognates of ‹exodus›, ‹period›, ‹synod›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metoikos"><i>métoikos<br/>métoikoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Metic. Literally, “metic”. Still more literally, “housed with”, combining <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, <a href="#oikos">oîkos</a>. </i>A resident alien; though a permanent inhabitant of the <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>, </i>never a <i><a href="#polites">polítēs</a>. </i>No relation to ‹hermetic›. Cognate of ‹metic›. See also: <i><a href="#apeleutheros">apeleútheroi</a>, <a href="#barbaros">bárbaroi</a>, <a href="#xenos">xénos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metonomasia"><i>metonomasía<br/>metonomasíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “renaming”, combining <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>Changing the <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> </i>requires a <i><a href="#telete">teletḗ</a> </i>with at least <a href="#dyo">two</a> other <a href="#people">people</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="metrikos"><i>metrikós<br/>metrikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Metric. Literally, “metric”. Still more literally, “measurement”. No relation to <i><a href="#metoikos">métoikos</a>, <a href="#meter">mḗtēr</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹metric›, ‹‑metric›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="miasma"><i>míasma<br/>miásmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Miasma. Literally, “miasma”. Still more literally, “defilement”, “pollution”, “taint”, or “stain”. May be spiritual, moral, or <a href="#physikon">physical</a>. Almost <a href="#pas">all</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a> can be <a href="#katharmos">purged</a> through <i><a href="#katharmos">kátharmos</a>, </i>though not necessarily quickly or easily. Cognate of ‹miasma›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="miklos"><i>Míklos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Nicky. Literally, “Nicky”. My name, or at least what I am called: the <i><a href="#hypokorismos">hypokorismós</a> </i>of <i><a href="#nikolaos">Nikólaos</a>. </i>As a kindness, and so as to avoid suspicion, I allow old-timers to refer to me as <i>«<a href="#miklos">Míklos</a> <a href="#he">ho</a> <a href="#neos">neṓteros</a>». </i>By this <i><a href="#diakritonymion">diakritōnýmion</a> </i>am I distinguished as the younger. For they imagine that my absent “father”, whom I am, passed his name on to his “son”. No relation to ‹Old Nick›, ‹Little Nicky›. Cognate of ‹Nicky›, ‹Nicky Junior›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="misthoo"><i>misthóō</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “hire” or “rent”.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mneme"><i>mnḗmē<br/>mnêmai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mneme. Literally, “mneme”. Still more literally, “memory”. No relation to ‹meme›, nor <a href="#ailouros">cats</a>. Cognate of ‹mneme›, ‹mnemon‑›, ‹mnemo‑›; related to the cognate of ‹mnemon›, ‹mnemonic›, ‹amnesia›. See also: <i><a href="#lethe">lḗthē</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="moira"><i>moîra<br/>moîrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Moira. Literally, “moira”. Still more literally, “fate” or “destiny”. Even more literally, “(one’s) allotment”. No relation to ‹Moira›, which is actually ‹Máire›, from ‹Mary›. Cognate of ‹moira›, ‹moirai›. See also: <i><a href="#moros">móros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="moly"><i>môly</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Moly. Literally, “moly”, from <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. The adjuring herb, distinguished by its white blossoms, black roots, and <a href="#lethe">unforgettable</a> scent: reminiscent of <a href="#amphi">both</a> fresh leeks and dried roses. While not <a href="#hieros">holy</a>, it is <a href="#thanatos">deadly</a> to <a href="#thnetos">mortals</a>, no matter how mighty. Cognate of ‹moly›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="molybdos"><i>mólybdos<br/>mólybdoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “lead”, the <i><a href="#stoicheion">stoicheîon</a>, </i>through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. No relation to <i><a href="#moly">môly</a>. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹molybdenum›, an entirely different <i><a href="#stoicheion">stoicheîon</a>, </i>though only by error. See also: <i><a href="#sakcharonmolybdou">sákcharon molýbdou</a>, <a href="#metallon">métallon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="monochiton"><i>monochítôn<br/>monochítônes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “tunic alone”, combining <i><a href="#monos">mónos</a>, <a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a>. </i>A <a href="#chiton">tunic</a> worn without a <i><a href="#himation">himátion</a> </i>or other <a href="#himation">cloak</a>, whether out of simplicity, <a href="#praktikos">practicality</a>, or <a href="#peinaleos">poverty</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="monogmaia"><i>monogamía<br/>monogamíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Monogamy. Literally, “monogamy”, combining <i><a href="#monos">mónos</a>, <a href="#gamos">gámos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “single marriage”. For <a href="#tis">some</a>, too few spouses; for others, too <a href="#poly">many</a>. Cognate of ‹monogamy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#polygamia">polygamía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="monoglottos"><i>monóglōttos<br/>monóglōttoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Monoglot. Literally, “monoglot”, combining <i><a href="#monos">mónos</a>, <a href="#glossa">glôssa</a>. </i>Still more literally, “one tongue”. A monolingual <a href="#prosopon">person</a>; by implication, a simpleton. Cognate of ‹monoglot›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#polyglottos">polýglōttos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="monopolion"><i>monopṓlion<br/>monopṓlia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Monopoly. Literally, “monopoly”, combining <i><a href="#monos">mónos</a>, pṓlos. </i>Still more literally, “single seller”. No relation to <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹monopoly›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="monos"><i>mónos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mono. Literally, “mono”. Still more literally, “alone”, “single”, “solitary”. Its combining form is <i><a href="#heis">mono‑</a>. </i>No relation to hands or <a href="#moira">fate</a>. Cognate of ‹mono›. See also: <i><a href="#monochiton">monochítôn</a>, <a href="#monogmaia">monogamía</a>, <a href="#monoglottos">monóglōttos</a>, <a href="#monopolion">monopṓlion</a>, <a href="#monotheismos">monotheïsmós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="monotheismos"><i>monotheïsmós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Monotheism. Literally, “monotheism”, combining <i><a href="#monos">mónos</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “one god”. For <a href="#tis">some</a>, too few; for others, too <a href="#poly">many</a>. Cognate of ‹monotheism›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#polytheismos">polytheïsmós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="moros"><i>móros<br/>móroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fate”, “doom”, or “death”, with the connotation of inescapable <a href="#olethros">destruction</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#moron">mōrós</a>, </i>‹morose›. Related to the cognate of ‹mortal›. See also: <i><a href="#moira">moîra</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="moron"><i>mōrós<br/>mōroí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “moron” or “fool”. Dull or stupid. No relation to <i><a href="#moros">móros</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹moron›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#aphron">áphrōn</a>, <a href="#euethes">euḗthēs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="morphe"><i>morphḗ<br/>morphaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Morph. Literally, “morph”. Still more literally, “shape” or “form”. Cognate of ‹morph›, ‹morph‑›, ‹morpho‑›, ‹‑morph›; related to the cognates of ‹Morpheus›, ‹Mighty Morphin Power Rangers›. See also: <i><a href="#metamorphosis">metamórphōsis</a>, <a href="#polymorphosis">polymórphōsis</a>, <a href="#polymorphia">polymorphía</a>, <a href="#gesmorphopoias">gês morphopoḯas</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mousike"><i>mousikḗ<br/>mousikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Music. Literally, “music”. Still more literally, “art of the Muses”. Broadly encompasses <a href="#poiesis">poetry</a>, dance, and other <a href="#poiesis">creative</a> arts. Cognate of ‹music›; related to the cognates of ‹Muse›, ‹museum›, and the inspirational sense of ‹muse›, though no relation to the cognates of ‹amuse›, ‹muzzle›, or the dreamy-<a href="#ennoia">thought</a> sense of ‹muse›. See also: <a href="#fournumeracies">four numeracies</a>, <i><a href="#mousikos">mousikós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mousikos"><i>mousikós<br/>mousikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Musician. Literally, “musician”, referencing <i><a href="#mousike">mousikḗ</a>. </i>More broadly, <a href="#tis">any</a> skilled artist in <a href="#poiesis">poetry</a>, dance, or other <a href="#poiesis">creative</a> arts. No relation to <i><a href="#mys">mŷs</a>, </i>‹Mouseketeer›. Cognate of ‹musician›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mys"><i>mŷs<br/>mŷes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mouse. Literally, “mouse” or “muscle”. A rodent of usual size, although the term refers also to the <a href="#tis">somewhat</a> <a href="#megas">larger</a>, scaly-tailed sort that is associated with the field: the ‹rat›. As a flexing muscle looks like a mouse scurrying under your skin, they share a name. The specific meaning is, of course, obvious in context. And though mice vary in size and strength, I would call <a href="#oudeis">none</a> of them mighty. No relation to ‹myco‑›, ‹Micky›, <i><a href="#mousikos">mousikós</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹mouse›, ‹muscle›, ‹murine›, ‹myo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹mussel›, ‹myocardium›. See also: <i><a href="#megalomyoxiphophoros">megalomyoxiphophóros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mysterion"><i>mystḗrion<br/>mystēria</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Mystery. Literally, “mystery”. Still more literally, “shut (mouth or eyes)”, symbolizing secrecy or <a href="#kryptos">hidden</a> <a href="#gnosis">knowledge</a>. Specifically, the secret <a href="#telete">ritual</a> during which an <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> </i>is <a href="#krino">chosen</a> by the <i><a href="#mystes">mýstēs</a>, </i>whether an adulthood <a href="#telete">rite</a> or cultic <a href="#mystes">initiation</a>. Cognate of ‹mystery›. See also: <i><a href="#telete">teletḗ</a>, <a href="#ephebeia">ephēbeía</a>, <a href="#partheneia">partheneía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="mystes"><i>mýstēs<br/>mýstai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Initiate into the <i><a href="#mysterion">mystēria</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="name"><i>Name</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>The <i><a href="#etymonymon">Etymṓnymon</a> </i>of a <a href="#theos">god</a>. See also: <i><a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>, <a href="#blasphemia">blasphēmía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="naophylax"><i>naophýlax<br/>naophýlakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Temple warden or templar. Literally, “temple guardian”, combining <i><a href="#naos">naós</a>, <a href="#phylax">phýlax</a>. </i>A devout volunteer. See also: <i><a href="#neokoros">neṓkoros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="naos"><i>naós<br/>naoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Naos. Literally, “naos”. Still more literally, “dwelling”, referring to that of the <a href="#theos">god</a>. Technically, just the <i><a href="#hadyton">hádyton</a> </i>of the temple. Through <i><a href="#synekdoche">synekdochḗ</a>, </i>the entirety of it. Cognate of ‹naos›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="naukleros"><i>naúklēros<br/>naúklēroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “ship (ownership) lot-holder”. A ship-<a href="#despotes">master</a>, whether owner or commander. Related to the cognates of ‹nautical›, ‹clerk›, ‹clergy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nekromanteia"><i>nekromanteía<br/>nekromanteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Necromancy. Literally, “necromancy”, combining <i><a href="#nekros">nekrós</a>, <a href="#manteia">manteía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “corpse divination”. Strictly, refers only to <a href="#manteia">divination</a>; typically, refers also to the forbidden art of <i><a href="#anastasis">anástasis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹necromancy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nekromantis"><i>nekrómantis<br/>nekrómanteis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Necromancer. Literally, “necromancer”, referencing <i><a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹necromancer›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nekromiasma"><i>nekromíasma<br/>nekromiásmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “corpse taint”, combining <i><a href="#nekros">nekrós</a>, <a href="#miasma">míasma</a>. </i>The clinging taint of <i><a href="#skia">skiaí</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#thanatomiasma">thanatomíasma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nekropyra"><i>nekropyrā́<br/>nekropyraí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “corpse pyre”, combining <i><a href="#nekros">nekrós</a>, <a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>. </i>Funeral pyre: a <a href="#genos">type</a> of <i><a href="#katharmos">kátharmos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nekros"><i>nekrós<br/>nekrói</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Necro‑. Literally, “necro‑”. Still more literally, “dead” or “corpse”. Cognate of ‹necro‑›; related to the cognates of ‹necromancy›, ‹necrotic›. In older <a href="#poiesis">poetry</a>, <i>nekýs </i>was instead used for the noun.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nekrozoos"><i>nekrozṓōs<br/>nekrozṓioi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “living corpse”, combining <i><a href="#nekros">nekrós</a>, <a href="#zoe">zōḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “undead”. Not quite <a href="#zoe">alive</a>, not yet <a href="#thanatos">dead</a>; still <a href="#peinaleos">hungry</a>. Curiously, not the same as unliving, which is just <a href="#thanatos">dead</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#athanatos">athánatos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nektar"><i>néktar<br/>néktara</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Nectar. Literally, “nectar”, combining <i><a href="#nekros">nekrós</a>, ‑tar. </i>Still more literally, “death-defeating”. The <a href="#theos">divine</a>, <a href="#chrysos">golden</a> fluid <a href="#poiesis">created</a> by the <a href="#theos">gods</a> to store Their <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>. </i>Refers also to what <a href="#melissa">bees</a> exclusively survive on: an insectoid connection that chills the heart. Cognate of ‹nectar›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="neoatlantis"><i>Neoatlantís</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Neo-Atlantis. Literally, “Neo-Atlantis”, combining <i><a href="#neos">néos</a>, <a href="#atlantis">Atlantìs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “<a href="#neos">New</a> <a href="#atlantis">Atlantis</a>”.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="neokoros"><i>neṓkoros<br/>neṓkoroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Neokoros. Literally, “neokoros”, combining <i><a href="#naos">naós</a>, koréō. </i>Still more literally, “temple sweeper”. A temple custodian; sactristan. It is a mundane, administrative job, distinct from priesthood. Cognate of ‹neokoros›, ‹neocorus›. See also: <i><a href="#naophylax">naophýlax</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="neos"><i>néos<br/>néoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Neo‑. Literally, “neo‑”. Still more literally, “new” or “young”. No relation to ‹Neo›, ‹Mr. Anderson›. Cognate of ‹neo‑›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nike"><i>níkē<br/>nîkai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Nike. Literally, “nike”. Still more literally, “victory”. Not as easy as just doing it. Cognate of ‹nike›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nikolaion"><i>Nikoláion</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p><i><a href="#nikolaos">Nikólaos</a>, </i>except gender-<a href="#oudeteron">neutral</a> or perhaps just diminutive.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nikolaos"><i>Nikólaos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Nicholas. Literally, “Nicholas”, combining <i><a href="#nike">níkē</a>, <a href="#laos">laós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “people’s champion” or perhaps “conqueror of people”. Even more literally, “victory of the people”. A nickname <a href="#eu">well</a>-earned, and though it is only a <i><a href="#prosonymia">prosonymía</a>, </i>I do not correct those who take it as an <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> — </i>or, rather, the <a href="#prosopon">personal</a> name that comprises part of it. For, in their <a href="#synesis">understanding</a>, my <i><a href="#onoma">ónoma</a> </i>is <i>Nikólaos Nikoláou — </i>the son inheriting his <a href="#pater">father</a>’s name. Cognate of ‹Nicholas›, ‹Nicholas Nicholson›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#miklos">Míklos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nitrogenes"><i>nitrogenḗs<br/>nitrogeneîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Nitrogen. Literally, “nitrogen”, combining <i>nítron, <a href="#genos">génos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “niter-generated”. Cognate of ‹nitrogen›. See also: <i><a href="#atmos">atmós</a></i>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="noeikalos"><i>nóei kalôs<br/>noeîte kalôs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “perceive well”, combining <i><a href="#nous">noûs</a>, kalôs. </i>Still more literally, “think beautifully”. An instruction to take careful note; akin to ‹nota bene›. Related to the cognates of ‹calligraphy›, ‹calisthenics›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="noeraigis"><i>noerā́igis<br/>noeraíges</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “mind shield” or “thought shield”, combining <i><a href="#nous">noûs</a>, <a href="#aigis">aigís</a>. </i>So long as you can maintain this, your <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> </i>might as well be “Nobody”.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nomike"><i>nomikḗ</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “law”, “custom”, “jurisprudence”. No, no relation to ‹mike›. Related to the cognates of ‹autonomy›, ‹metronome›, ‹Deuteronomy›, ‹economics›. See also: <i><a href="#paideiaarkanos">paidéia árkanos</a>, <a href="#dike">díkē</a>, <a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nomisma"><i>nómisma<br/>nómismata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Numism‑. Literally, “numism‑”, referencing <i><a href="#nomike">nomikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “coin”. Minted in <a href="#chalkos">copper</a>, <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a>, <a href="#argyros">silver</a>, <a href="#electrum">electrum</a>, or <a href="#chrysos">gold</a>. From <a href="#hypo">lowest</a> to <a href="#akros">highest</a> value: <i><a href="#lepton">leptón</a>, <a href="#chalkous">chalkoûs</a>, <a href="#tetartemorion">tetartēmórion</a>, <a href="#hemiobolion">hēmiōbólion</a>, <a href="#obolos">obolós</a>, <a href="#diobolon">dióbolon</a>, <a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>, <a href="#didrachmon">dídrachmon</a>, <a href="#tetradrachmon">tetrádrachmon</a>, <a href="#stater">statḗr</a>, <a href="#dekadrachmon">dekádrachmon</a>. </i>Note that this is the system used for <a href="#hemera">everyday</a> transactions; another system applies to trade and regional commerce. Cognate of ‹numism‑›; related to the cognates of ‹numismatics›, ‹numismatology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nous"><i>noûs<br/>noés</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Nous. Literally, “nous”. Still more literally, “mind”, “intellect”, or “thinking”. The rational part of the <i><a href="#psyche">psychḗ</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹nous›; related to the cognate of ‹noetic›, ‹paranoia›. See also: <i><a href="#ennoia">énnoia</a>, <a href="#noeikalos">nóei kalôs</a>, <a href="#noeraigis">noerā́igis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="numbers"><i>numbers</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#heis">heîs</a>, <a href="#dyo">dýo</a>, <a href="#treis">treîs</a>, <a href="#tettares">téttares</a>,
<a href="#pente">pénte</a>, <a href="#hex">héx</a>,
<a href="#hepta">heptá</a>, <a href="#okto">oktṓ</a>,
<a href="#ennea">ennéa</a>, <a href="#deka">déka</a>,
<a href="#hendeka">héndeka</a>, <a href="#dodeka">dṓdeka</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="nyx"><i>nýx<br/>nýktes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “night”. Personified by the <a href="#poiesis">poets</a> as <a href="#meter">mother</a> of <i><a href="#hypnos">Hýpnos</a> </i>and perhaps even <i><a href="#thanatos">Thánatos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹night›; related to the cognates of ‹nyctalopia›, ‹nyctophobia›, ‹nocturnal›. See also: <a href="#times">times</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="omega"><i>ô méga</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Omega. Literally, “omega”. Still more literally “big o”, referencing <i><a href="#megas">mégas</a></i>. In contrast with the “small o” of <i>«ò mikrón», </i>which is to say, ‹omicron›. This <i><a href="#gramma">grámma</a>, </i><a href="#morphe">shaped</a> like an omega, is the <a href="#eschatos">last</a> in the <i><a href="#alphabetos">álphabētos</a>; </i>hence, it denotes the ending. Should this not, therefore, be the <a href="#eschatos">last</a> entry in the glossary? While we’re at it, note also that <i>zêta </i>is the 6<span class="superscript">th </span>letter, not the 24<span class="superscript">th </span>or <a href="#eschatos">last</a>: that would be absurd. Cognate of ‹omega›; related to the cognate of ‹O›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#alpha">álpha</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="obeliskos"><i>obelískos<br/>obelískoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Obelisk. Literally, “obelisk”. Still more literally, “spit”, “skewer”, “four-sided pillar”. An upright, <a href="#tettares">four</a>-sided monolith that tapers until it reaches the <i><a href="#pyramidion">pyramídion</a> </i>at its tip. For example: ‹Washington Monument›, ‹Saturn V Rocket›. Cognate of ‹obelisk›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="obolos"><i>obolós<br/>oboloí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Obol. Literally, “obol”, referencing <i><a href="#obeliskos">obelískos</a>, </i>reflecting the early practice of using <a href="#metallon">metal</a> <a href="#rhabdos">rods</a> as currency. A <a href="#argyros">silver</a> <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> worth a 6<span class="superscript">th </span>of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹obol›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oide"><i>ōidḗ<br/>ōidaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ode. Literally, “ode”. Still more literally, “song” or “chant”. Cognate of ‹ode›. See also: <i><a href="#tragoidia">tragōidía</a>, <a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a>, <a href="#hymnos">hýmnos</a>, <a href="#skolion">skólion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oikeios"><i>oikeîos<br/>oikeîoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “housemate”, referencing <i><a href="#oikos">oîkos</a>. </i>Metaphorically, “close relation”, perhaps even an extended relative who does not cohabitate. Refers only to <a href="#genos">family</a> members, thus excluding <i><a href="#oiketes">oikétai</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oiketes"><i>oikétēs<br/>oikétai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “household attendant”, referencing <i><a href="#oikos">oîkos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “belonging to the household”. A <a href="#zoe">live</a>-in <i><a href="#doulos">doûlos</a>, </i>hence a <a href="#oikos">house</a> <a href="#doulos">slave</a>. Provides domestic labor, including cleaning, cooking, child-rearing, companionship, and sexual services, as their <a href="#despotes">owner</a> desires. Contrast with: <i><a href="#oikeios">oikeîos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oikos"><i>oîkos<br/>oîkoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Oikos. Literally, “oikos”. Still more literally, “house” or “household”. The house itself and the <a href="#laos">people</a> in it, and — even more metaphorically — the estate or family. Cognate of ‹oikos›, ‹oecus›; related to the cognates of ‹economics›, ‹ecology›. See also: <i><a href="#oikeios">oikeîos</a>, <a href="#oiketes">oikétēs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oinochoe"><i>oinochóē<br/>oinochóai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Oinochoe. Literally, “oinochoe”, combining <i><a href="#oinos">oînos</a>, chéō. </i>Still more literally, “wine pourer”. A <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>pitcher, small enough to be carried around and poured with <a href="#heis">one</a> hand. Cognate of ‹oinochoe›, ‹oenochoe›; related to the cognates of ‹oenophile›, ‹chyme›, ‹ecchymosis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oinos"><i>oînos<br/>oînoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Oeno‑. Literally, “oeno‑”. Still more literally, “wine”. Cognate of ‹wine›, ‹oeno‑›, ‹oen‑›, ‹en‑›, ‹eno‑›; related to the cognates of ‹oenin›, ‹oenophile›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="okto"><i>oktṓ, oktás<br/>okto‑, ógdoos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Octo‑. Literally, “octo‑”. In cardinal (“eight”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“octad”), combining and ordinal (“eighth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹octroy›. Cognate of ‹octo‑›, ‹octa‑›, ‹oct‑›, ‹octad›; related to the cognates of ‹eight›, ‹October›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oleter"><i>oletḕr<br/>oletêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “ruin-bringer”, referencing <i><a href="#olethros">ólethros</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#prostates">prostátēs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="olethros"><i>ólethros<br/>ólethroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “annihilation”, “destruction”, “devastation”. See also: <i><a href="#oleter">oletḕr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="olokleromenetheorese"><i>oloklērōménē theṓrēsē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “comprehensive consideration”, from “whole-portion god-sight”, hence <i>oloklērōménē theṓrēsē, </i> combining <i>hólos, klēros, <a href="#theos">theós</a>,  horáō</i>. A holistic <a href="#opsis">view</a>: an approach that breaks down the barriers that distinguish <a href="#sophos">academic</a> subjects. Related to the cognates of ‹holistic›, ‹theory›, ‹theater›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="olympos"><i>Ólympos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Olympus. Literally, “Olympus”. The tallest mountain on <a href="#earth">Earth</a>, <a href="#gnosis">known</a> also as <i><a href="#kosmomphalos">Kosmomphalós</a>. </i><a href="#hieros">Sacred</a> to the <a href="#hypselos">high</a>-reaching <i><a href="#titan">Titânes</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹Olympus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="on"><i>ṓn<br/>óntes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Onto‑. Literally, “onto‑”. Still more literally, “being” or “existence”. Often a descriptor instead of a noun. Cognate of ‹onto‑›, ‹ont‑›. See also: <i><a href="#ontologia">ontología</a>, <a href="#ousia">ousía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="onokole"><i>onokṓlē<br/>onokṓlai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Onokole. Literally, “onokole”, combining <i>ónos, kōlos. </i>Still more literally, “donkey-rumped” or “donkey-legged”. An <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>for <i><a href="#empousa">émpousa</a>. </i>No relation to ‹onahole›. Cognate of ‹onokole›; related to the cognates of ‹ass›, ‹onager›, ‹onocentaur›, ‹colon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="onoma"><i>ónoma<br/>onómata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Name. Literally, “name”. Can refer to the <a href="#prosopon">personal</a> name (whether <a href="#etymonymon">true</a> or just a <a href="#prosonymia">nickname</a>), the full name, or <a href="#tis">anything</a> in between, depending on context. In its entirety, consists of <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#prosonymia">prosonymía</a>; <a href="#patronymikos">patrōnymikós</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#andronymikon">andrōnymikón</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#despotonymon">despotṓnymon</a>; <a href="#diakritonymion">diakritōnýmion</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#kenon">kenón</a>; <a href="#demosonymon">dēmosṓnymon</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#ethnoonymon">ethnoṓnymon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹name›, ‹‑onym‑›; related to the cognates of ‹nomenclature›, ‹anonymous›. See also: <a href="#appellation">appellation</a>, <i><a href="#hypokorismos">hypokorismós</a>, <a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a>, <a href="#eponymos">epṓnymos</a>, </i><a href="#name">Name</a>, <i><a href="#pseudonymon">pseudṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ontologia"><i>ontología<br/>ontologíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ontology. Literally, “ontology”, combining <i><a href="#on">ṓn</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “existence study”. Cognate of ‹ontology›. See also: <i><a href="#ousia">ousía</a>, <a href="#kenon">kenón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ophthalmos"><i>ophthalmós, ophthalmoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Opthalmo‑. Literally, “opthalmo‑”, referencing <i><a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “eye”. Cognate of ‹opthalmo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹ophthalmology›, ‹opto‑›, ‹optic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="opion"><i>ópion<br/>ópia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Opium. Literally, “opium”. Still more literally, “juice” or “sap”. This <i><a href="#kataprayntikos">katapraýntikós</a> </i>is epithetized as <i><a href="#galatespaparounes">gála tês paparoúnēs</a>. </i>The heroic version is even better. Cognate of ‹opium›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="opsis"><i>ópsis<br/>ópseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Optic. Literally, “optic”, referencing <i>horáō. </i>Still more literally, “sight” or “vision”. Metaphorically, “appearance”, “view”. Cognate of ‹optic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oreichalkos"><i>oreíchalkos<br/>oreíchalkoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Aurichalcum. Literally, “aurichalcum”, combining <i>óros, <a href="#chalkos">chalkós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “mountain copper”. A particularly <a href="#chrysos">golden</a> alloy of <a href="#chalkos">brass</a>, yet only a <a href="#moron">fool</a> would <a href="#hamartia">mistake</a> it for <a href="#chrysos">gold</a>. Cognate of ‹orichalcum›, ‹orichalc›, ‹orichalch›, ‹aurichalcum›, ‹chalcopyrite›; related to the cognate of ‹orology›. See also: <i><a href="#oreichalkosaion">Oreíchalkos Aiṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oreichalkosaion"><i>Oreíchalkos Aiṓn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “aurichalcum aeon”, combining <i><a href="#oreichalkos">oreíchalkos</a>, <a href="#aion">aiṓn</a>. </i>The Aurichalcum Age of opportunity.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="orthographia"><i>orthographía<br/>orthographíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Orthography. Literally, “orthography”, combining <i><a href="#orthros">órthros</a>, <a href="#graphis">graphís</a>. </i>Still more literally, “correct writing”. The aspect of written <a href="#glossa">language</a> concerned with spelling, punctuation, and other symbols in accordance with standard usage. Also refers to the orthographic system of a given <i><a href="#lexis">léxis</a>. </i>For example, this document uses: plain <a href="#gramma">text</a> for <a href="#ennoia">concepts</a>, with quotes like “this”; italics for <a href="#lexis">words</a> in <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a>, </i>with quotes in traditional <i><a href="#eisagogikon">eisagōgiká</a> </i>like <i>«toûto»; </i>plain <a href="#gramma">text</a> inside <i><a href="#xenoeisagogikon">xenoeisagōgiká</a> </i>for ‹English›; and italics inside <i><a href="#xenoeisagogikon">xenoeisagōgiká</a> </i>for <i>‹elliniká›, </i>or as you call it, ‹Greek›. Cognate of ‹orthography›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="orthros"><i>órthros<br/>órthroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ortho‑. Literally, “ortho‑”. Still more literally, “pre-dawn” or “daybreak”. Even more literally, “stand straight” or “stand correctly”, referring to the <a href="#helios">Sun</a> getting up. It brings with it <i><a href="#heos">hēṓs</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹ortho‑›, ‹orth‑›; related to the cognates of ‹orthodox›, ‹orthopedic›. See also: <a href="#times">times</a>, <i><a href="#orthographia">orthographía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="orykton"><i>oryktón<br/>oryktá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Orycto‑. Literally, “orycto‑”. Still more literally, “dug up”, hence minerals. No relation to ‹ore›. Cognate of ‹orycto‑›, ‹oryct‑›; related to the cognates of ‹oryctology›, ‹oryctognosy›, ‹oryx›, ‹orycteropus›, ‹oryctolagus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="osteon"><i>ostéon<br/>ostâ</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Osteo‑. Literally, “osteo‑”. Still more literally, “bone”. Cognate of ‹osteo‑›, ‹oste‑›, ‹oss‑›; related to the cognates of ‹ossify›, ‹osteopathy›, ‹ossuary›, ‹osteoblast›, ‹osseous›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ou"><i>oú<br/>oúk, oúch</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “not”. Factual negation. The three versions are used before words with starting with a consonant, smooth breathing vowel, or rough-breathing vowel, respectively. No relation to ‹ouch›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oudeis"><i>oúdeís, oúdemía<br/>oúdén</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “no one” or “no thing”, combining <i><a href="#ou">oú</a>, <a href="#heis">heîs</a>. </i>In <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>, <a href="#theleia">feminine</a>, and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="oudeteron"><i>oudéteron<br/>oudétera</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “neuter” or “neutral”, combining <i><a href="#ou">oú</a>, dé, héteros. </i>Still more literally, “not either”. Can refer to <a href="#grammatike">grammatical</a> or <a href="#anthropos">human</a> gender. No relation to castration. Cognate of ‹neuter›, ‹neutral›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouraniobos"><i>Ouraníobos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “celestial bull”, combining <i><a href="#ouranios">ouránios</a>, <a href="#bous">boûs</a>. </i>A monstrous <i><a href="#chimaira">chímaira</a>: </i>blue and dove-winged, though fortunately <a href="#peinaleos">lacking</a> a <a href="#anthropos">human</a> <a href="#kephale">head</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouraniodoryphoron"><i>ouraniodoryphóron<br/>Ouraniodoryphóra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “heavenly spear-carrier”, combining <i><a href="#ouranios">ouránios</a>, <a href="#doryphoros">doryphóros</a>. </i>Metaphorically, a <a href="#ouranoi">celestial</a> <a href="#soma">body</a> which attends a <a href="#megas">larger</a> <a href="#heis">one</a> by orbiting it, including a <a href="#physikon">natural</a> <a href="#heis">one</a> such as <i><a href="#selenaion">Selēnaîon</a> </i><a href="#hyper">over</a> <i><a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a>. </i>When capitalized and plural, refers specifically to the <a href="#metaphysikon">supernatural</a> <i><a href="#basileiaientoisouranois">basileîai en toîs Ouranoîs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouranionepipedon"><i>Ouránion Epípedon</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “the celestial plane”, combining <i><a href="#ouranios">ouránios</a>, epípedon. </i>The imaginary surface along which the <a href="#wanderers">Wanderers</a> wander.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouranios"><i>ouránios<br/>ouránioi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ouranian. Literally, “ouranian”. Still more literally, “heavenly”, “celestial”, or “of the Sky”; sometimes also metaphorically. Cognate of ‹ouranian›, ‹uranian›; related to the cognates of ‹uranology›, ‹Uranus›, ‹uranium›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#hadeios">hádeios</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#ouranoi">Ouranoí</a>, <a href="#ouraniotheos">ouraniótheos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouraniotheos"><i>ouraniótheos<br/>Ouraniótheoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “heavenly god”, combining <i><a href="#ouranios">ouránios</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>Called also: <a href="#helios">Sun</a> <a href="#theos">god</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouranoi"><i>Ouranoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “the heavens”, referencing <i><a href="#ouranios">ouránios</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ouroboros"><i>Ouróboros<br/>ouróboros óphis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ouroboros. Literally, “Ouroboros”. Still more literally, “tail devouring (snake)”. Cognate of ‹Ouroboros›, ‹Uroboros›; related to the cognates of ‹arse›, ‹ass›, ‹voracious›, ‹ophidian›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ousia"><i>ousía<br/>ousíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Ousia. Literally, “ousia”, referencing <i><a href="#on">ṓn</a>. </i>Still more literally, “essence” or “substance”. Even more literally, “state of being”. Cognate of ‹ousia›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kenon">kenón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="outopia"><i>outopía<br/>outopíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Utopia. Literally, “utopia”, combining <i><a href="#ou">oú</a>, <a href="#topos">tópos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “no place”. Cognate of ‹utopia›; related to the cognates of ‹dystopia›, ‹topography›. The total opposite of <i><a href="#eutopia">eutopía</a>, </i>or is it? See also: <i><a href="#paradeisos">parádeisos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paideia"><i>paidéia<br/>paideîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Paedia. Literally, “‑paedia”, referencing <i><a href="#pais">paîs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “education”. Cognate of ‹‑paedia›, ‹‑pædia›, ‹‑pedia›; related to the cognates of ‹encyclopedia›, ‹Wikipedia›, ‹pedagogy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paideiaarkanos"><i>paidéia árkanos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “hidden education”, combining <i><a href="#paideia">paidéia</a>, <a href="#arkanon">árkana</a>. </i>Arcane learning: the formal study of <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#iatrike">iatrikḗ</a>, <a href="#nomike">nomikḗ</a>, <a href="#theologia">theología</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paideiaeleutheron"><i>paidéia eleuthérōn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “free man’s education”, combining <i><a href="#paideia">paidéia</a>, <a href="#eleutheros">eleútheros</a>. </i>A <a href="#eleutheros">liberal</a> <a href="#mousike">arts</a> <a href="#paideia">education</a>, suitable for the <i><a href="#polites">polítēs</a>. </i>See also: <a href="#threeliteracies">three literacies</a>, <a href="#fournumeracies">four numeracies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paideiatechnike"><i>paidéia technikḗ</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “technical education”, combining <i><a href="#paideia">paidéia</a>, <a href="#technike">technikḗ</a>. </i>Vocational training, suitable for the <a href="#doulos">slave</a> or laborer.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pais"><i>paîs<br/>paîdes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “child”, “boy”, “girl”, “youth”, or “servant”. The specific meaning is, of course, obvious in context. Or, I suppose, you could specify <i><a href="#arsenikos">arsenikós</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#theleia">thḗleia</a>, </i>or even say <i><a href="#kouros">koûros</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#kore">kórē</a>, </i>if they are youths. Related to the cognates of ‹paediatrics›, ‹pediatrics›, and certain other words that are best omitted.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pale"><i>pálē<br/>pálai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “wrestling”. Still more literally, “throwing”. No relation to ‹pale›. Related to the cognate of ‹palaestra›. See also: <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paliggenesia"><i>Paliggenesía<br/>paliggenesíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Palingenesis. Literally, “palingenesis”, combining <i>pálin, <a href="#genos">génos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “rebirth” or “born again”. The end of <i><a href="#aioniosstasis">Aiṓnios Stásis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹palingenesis›; related to the cognate of ‹palindrome›. See also: <i><a href="#chryseosaion">Chrýseos Aiṓn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="panagathos"><i>panágathos<br/>panágathoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “all-good”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#agathos">agathós</a>. </i>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pankration"><i>pankrátion<br/>pankrátia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pankration. Literally, “pankration”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “all strength”. The <a href="#agon">sport</a> of <a href="#hoplon">unarmed</a> combat uniting <i><a href="#pygme">pygmḗ</a> </i>with <i><a href="#pale">pálē</a> </i>while adding <a href="#technike">techniques</a> found in neither, such as kicks and chokes. Cognate of ‹pankration›. See also: <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="panoplia"><i>panoplía<br/>panoplíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Panoply. Literally, “panoply”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#hoplon">hópla</a>. </i>Still more literally, “all arms” or “all armor”. Full set of armor and weapons that a <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a> </i>wears. Includes: <i><a href="#dory">dóry</a>, <a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>, <a href="#aspis">aspís</a>, <a href="#kranos">krános</a>, <a href="#thorax">thṓrax</a> (</i>or <i><a href="#linothorax">linothṓrax</a>), <a href="#knemis">knēmídes</a>. </i>Donned <a href="#epi">over</a> <i><a href="#chitoniskos">chitônískos</a> </i>or <i><a href="#exomis">exōmís</a>, </i>and under <i><a href="#chlamys">chlamýs</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹panoply›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pantepoptes"><i>pantepóptēs<br/>pantepóptai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “all-seeing”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pantheion"><i>pántheion<br/>pántheia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pantheon. Literally, “pantheon”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “all gods”. The <a href="#theos">divine</a> <a href="#oikos">family</a> composed of <a href="#pas">all</a> of the <a href="#theos">gods</a> under the same <i><a href="#theogoneus">theogoneús</a>. </i>Also, a temple dedicated to <a href="#tis">one</a> such <a href="#hieros">sacred</a> <a href="#oikos">family</a>. No relation to ‹panther›. Cognate of ‹pantheon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="panthemistos"><i>panthémistos<br/>panthémistoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “all-just”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#themis">thémis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pantheoouranoktonos"><i>pantheoouranoktónos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “slayer of all heavenly gods”, combining <i><a href="#pantheion">pántheion</a>, <a href="#ouraniotheos">Ouraniótheoi</a>, <a href="#ktonos">któnos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pantognostes"><i>pantognṓstēs<br/>pantognṓstai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “all-knowing”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#gnosis">gnôsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pantokrator"><i>pantokrátōr<br/>pantokrátores</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pantocrator. Literally, “pantocrator”, combining <i><a href="#pas">pâs</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “all-mighty” or “all-powerful”. Cognate of ‹pantocrator›. See also: <i><a href="#pankration">pankrátion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="para"><i>pará</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Para‑. Literally, “para‑”. Still more literally, “beside”, “near”, “alongside”, “contrary to”. Cognate of ‹para‑›; related to the cognates of ‹paranormal›, ‹parallel›, ‹parody›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paradeisos"><i>parádeisos<br/>parádeisoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Paradise. Literally, “paradise”. Still more literally, “wall around (garden)”, through <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence. When capitalized, the mythical <i><a href="#eutopia">eutopía</a>, </i>associated simultaneously with <i><a href="#edem">Edém</a>, <a href="#elysion">Ēlýsion</a>, <a href="#ouranoi">Ouranoí</a>, <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a>; </i>essentially, anywhere other than here, hence <i><a href="#outopia">outopía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹paradise›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paradoxon"><i>parádoxon<br/>parádoxa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Paradox. Literally, “paradox”, combining <i><a href="#para">pará</a>, dóxa. </i>Still more literally, “contrary to expectation”. Cognate of ‹paradox›; related the cognate of ‹orthodox›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paretymologia"><i>paretymología<br/>paretymologíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Paretymology. Literally, “paretymology”, combining <i><a href="#para">pará</a>, <a href="#etymon">étymon</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>. </i>False etymology, including folk etymology and <a href="#pseudos">false</a> cognates. As you can see, I strictly avoid this<i>! </i>Cognate of ‹paretymology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="paroidia"><i>parōidía<br/>parōidíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Parody. Literally, “parody”, combining <i><a href="#para">pará</a>, <a href="#oide">ōidḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “contrary song”. Specifically, imitation with an insulting twist. Cognate of ‹parody›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="partheneia"><i>partheneía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Partheno‑. Literally, “partheno‑”. Still more literally, “maidenhood”. The period of training in a <a href="#kore">girl</a>’s <a href="#bios">life</a> before she is <a href="#mystes">initiated</a> into the <i><a href="#mysterion">mystēria</a> </i>and becomes an adult. The details of this are <a href="#gnosis">known</a> to all, except for <a href="#aner">men</a>, who are left to guess and wonder. There is little to wonder about, though, as she learns mostly <a href="#oikos">household</a> skills and <a href="#hieros">sacred</a> <a href="#oide">songs</a>. And there is, too, training in the arduous and painful plucking, singeing, and trimming of <a href="#soma">body</a> hair. ‹IYKYK›. Equivalent to, though less formal — and, obviously, less important — than, <i><a href="#ephebeia">ephēbeía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹partheno‑›, ‹parthen‑›; related to the cognates of ‹parthenogenesis›, ‹Parthenon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pas"><i>pâs, pâsa, pân<br/>pántes, pâsai, pánta</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pan‑. Literally, “pan‑”. Still more literally, “all”, “complete”, “every”, “everyone”, or “everything”. In <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>, <a href="#theleia">feminine</a>, and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively, and then again in plural <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹pan› or ‹pot›. Cognate of ‹pan‑›, ‹pant‑›; related to the cognates of ‹panorama›, ‹pandemic›, ‹panacea›, and <a href="#pas">all</a> the rest: too numerous to list here.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pater"><i>patḗr<br/>patéres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pater. Literally, “pater”. Still more literally, “father”. No relation to ‹patter›. Cognate of ‹father›, ‹pater›, ‹patri‑›, ‹patro‑›, ‹patr‑›; related to the cognate of ‹patron›. See also: <i><a href="#patronymikos">patrōnymikós</a>, <a href="#theopator">theopátōr</a>, <a href="#goneus">goneús</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#meter">mḗtēr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pathos"><i>páthos<br/>páthē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pathos. Literally, “pathos”. Still more literally, “suffering”, “emotion”, or “experience”. Cognate of ‹pathos›; related to the cognate of ‹pathology›. See also: <i><a href="#empatheia">empátheia</a>, <a href="#sympatheia">sympátheia</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="patronymikos"><i>patrōnymikós<br/>patrōnymikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Patronymic. Literally, “patronymic”, combining <i><a href="#pater">patḗr</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>The possessive <a href="#morphe">form</a> of the <a href="#pater">father</a>’s name, used as part of the full name. Cognate of ‹patronymic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="peinaleos"><i>peinaléos<br/>peinaléoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Penury. Literally, “penury”. Still more literally, “hunger”, “lack”, “poverty”. No relation to ‹paean›. Cognate of ‹penury›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#plethora">plēthṓra</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="peirates"><i>peiratḗs<br/>peirataí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pirate. Literally, “pirate”. Still more literally, “(attack) attempter”. Like a <i><a href="#lestes">lēstḗs</a>, </i>only on a boat, and as likely to <a href="#doulos">enslave</a> as rob. Despite harmful stereotypes, no relation to eyepatches, peg legs, or parrots. Aaarrr! Cognate of ‹pirate›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pemptostoicheion"><i>pémpto stoicheîon</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fifth element”, combining <i><a href="#pente">pémptos</a>, <a href="#stoicheion">stoicheîon</a>. </i>It is <i><a href="#aither">aithḗr</a>, </i>the quintessence found only in the <a href="#ouranoi">Heavens</a>, hence forever out of reach. Traditionally, distinguished from <a href="#ge">earth</a>, <a href="#thalassa">water</a>, <a href="#aer">air</a>, and <a href="#pyr">fire</a>. Now, the learned understand it to be <i><a href="#aerionismenos">aḗr ionisménos</a>. </i>And the <a href="#sophia">wise</a> understand it to be immediately fatal to the very same <a href="#thnetos">mortals</a> who <a href="#peinaleos">crave</a> it.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pente"><i>pénte, pentás<br/>penta‑, pémptos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Penta‑. Literally, “penta‑”. In cardinal (“five”) <a href="#morphe">form</a>, and then again in collective (“pentad”), combining and ordinal (“fifth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹pent›. Cognate of ‹penta‑›, ‹pent‑›, ‹pentad›; related to the cognates of ‹five›, ‹quintuple›, ‹pentagonal›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="people"><i>people</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#anthropos">ánthrōpos</a>, <a href="#demos">dêmos</a>, <a href="#ethnos">éthnos</a>, <a href="#laos">laós</a>, <a href="#prosopon">prósōpon</a>, <a href="#thnetos">thnētós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="peplos"><i>péplos<br/>péploi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Peplos. Literally, “peplos”. An elegant robe or shawl, worn by <a href="#gyne">women</a> and frequently depicted on <a href="#theos">goddesses</a>. The <a href="#megas">large</a>, rectangular sheet — usually woolen, though sometimes of linen, or even <i><a href="#byssos">býssos</a> — </i>is artfully draped and fastened <a href="#epi">over</a> the shoulders, folded <a href="#kata">over</a> in an <i><a href="#apoptygma">apóptygma</a>, </i>pinned with brooches, and cinched at the waist. Worn instead of the <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a>, </i>oft with <i><a href="#perizoma">perízōma</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#strophion">stróphion</a>, </i>and typically with a <i><a href="#himation">himátion</a>. </i>Sometimes, a sleeveless <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a> </i>replaces these undergarments, though that can get a bit too warm. Cognate of ‹peplos›, ‹peplus›, ‹peplum›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="peri"><i>perí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Peri‑. Literally, “peri‑”. Still more literally, “around”, “near”, “about”. No relation to ‹peri›. Cognate of ‹peri‑›; related to the cognates of ‹peripheral›, ‹perinatal›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="peripatetikos"><i>peripatētikós<br/>peripatētikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Peripatetic. Literally, “peripatetic”, combining <i><a href="#peri">perí</a>, patéō. </i>Still more literally, “walking around”. Cognate of ‹peripatetic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="perizoma"><i>perízōma<br/>perízōmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Perizoma. Literally, “perizoma”, combining <i><a href="#peri">perí</a>, <a href="#zone">zṓnē</a>. </i>Still more literally, “belted around”. A loincloth or girdle wrapped around the waist and groin, worn either under the <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a> </i>or on its own, as in athletics. Cognate of ‹perizoma›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="petasos"><i>pétasos<br/>pétasoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Petasos. Literally, “petasos”. Still more literally, “spread out”. A broad-brimmed, rounded hat, oft with a chin strap or <a href="#desmos">ties</a> to keep it from flying off in the <a href="#aiolos">wind</a>. A <a href="#gyne">woman</a>’s has a <a href="#hyper">high</a> crown while a <a href="#aner">man</a>’s is <a href="#hypo">lower</a>. Worn, stereotypically, by travelers, farmers, and shepherds. No wings, though. Cognate of ‹petasos›, ‹petasus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="petteia"><i>petteía<br/>petteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Petteia. Literally, “petteia”. Still more literally, “pebble”. <a href="#epitheton">Epithetized</a> as the <a href="#agon">game</a> of <a href="#pyrenion">stones</a>, the timeless <a href="#pinax">board</a> <a href="#agon">game</a> involves the strategic movement of pieces on a grid to surround and capture the enemy’s. A <a href="#agon">game</a> of pure skill, <a href="#tis">one</a> may learn the rules in an afternoon, yet it takes a <a href="#bios">lifetime</a> — or longer — to <a href="#despotes">master</a>. Play is oft spiced with wager, leading to the saying: “In the <a href="#agon">game</a> of <a href="#pyrenion">stones</a>, you win or you’re <a href="#peinaleos">impoverished</a>”. Cognate of ‹petteia›; related to the cognates of ‹petrification›, ‹Peter›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phagos"><i>phagós<br/>phagoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phage. Literally, “phage”. Still more literally, “eater”, or even “glutton”. Cognate of ‹phage›, ‹phago‑›, ‹‑phage›. See also: <i><a href="#anthropophagos">anthrōpophágos</a>, <a href="#mageiophagos">mageiophágos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phallos"><i>phallós<br/>phalloí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phallus. Literally, “phallus”. This speaks for itself. Cognate of ‹phallus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phantasia"><i>phantasía<br/>phantasíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Fantasia. Literally, “fantasia”. Still more literally, “vision”, “appearance”, or “imagination”. In the general context of <i><a href="#mageia">mageíai</a>, </i>it is a <i><a href="#goeteia">goēteutikḕ</a> phantasía: </i>an illusion or glamor obscuring <a href="#aletheia">reality</a>. In the specific context of <i><a href="#telepatheia">tēlepátheia</a>, </i>it is the mental image or vision transmitted. No relation to <a href="#opsis">eyesight</a>. Cognate of ‹fantasia›, ‹fantasy›; related to the cognates of ‹phantasm›, ‹phantom›, ‹fantastic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pharmakon"><i>phármakon<br/>phármaka</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pharmaceutical. Literally, “pharmaceutical”. A medicine, drug, or poison. Cognate of ‹pharmaceutical›. See also: <i><a href="#poton">potón</a>, <a href="#philtron">phíltron</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="philia"><i>philíā<br/>philíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>‑Philia. Literally, “‑philia”. Still more literally, “friendship”. Brotherly <a href="#love">love</a>: reciprocal and <a href="#ekloge">chosen</a>, based on mutual respect. Cognate of ‹‑philia›, ‹‑phile›, ‹‑phil›, ‹philo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹audiophile›, ‹philosophy›, ‹hemophilia›, ‹Philip›. See also: <i><a href="#philostorgos">philóstorgos</a>, <a href="#philosophia">philosophía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="philosophia"><i>philosophía<br/>philosophíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Philosophy. Literally, “philosophy”, combining <i><a href="#philia">philíā</a>, <a href="#sophia">sophía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “love of wisdom”. Cognate of ‹philosophy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="philosophos"><i>philósophos<br/>philósophoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Philosopher. Literally, “philosopher”, referencing <i><a href="#philosophia">philosophía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹philosopher›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="philostorgos"><i>philóstorgos<br/>philóstorgoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “friendly natural affection”, combining <i><a href="#philia">philíā</a>, <a href="#storge">storgḗ</a>. </i>Cultivated and intentionally expressed familial <a href="#love">love</a>, combining kinship and friendship.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="philtron"><i>phíltron<br/>phíltra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Philter. Literally, “philter”, referencing <i><a href="#philia">philíā</a>, </i>from association with <a href="#love">love</a> <a href="#poton">potions</a> and aphrodisiacs. A <a href="#mageia">magical</a> <i><a href="#poton">potón</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹philter›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phlox"><i>phlóx<br/>phlóges</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phlox. Literally, “phlox”. Still more literally, “flame”, “blaze”. A thing of sublime beauty. No relation to ‹flux›. Cognate of ‹phlox›, ‹flame›, ‹flagrant›; related to the cognate of ‹conflagration›, ‹phlogiston›, ‹flammable›, ‹inflammable›. See also: <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phone"><i>phōnḗ<br/>phōnaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phone. Literally, “phone”. Still more literally, “voice” or “sound”. No relation to <i><a href="#phonos">phónos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹phone›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phonos"><i>phónos<br/>phónoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “murder”, “slaughter”, “killing”. The more general term, it stands <a href="#monos">alone</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#phone">phōnḗ</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#ktonos">któnos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phoros"><i>phóros<br/>phóroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phorous. Literally, “‑phorous”. Still more literally, “carrier”, “bearer”, or “bringer”. A <a href="#lexis">word</a> that carries quite a load. Cognate of ‹‑phorous›, ‹‑phorus›, ‹‑phora›, ‹‑phore›, ‹‑phor›, ‹‑ferous›, ‹‑fer›, ‹phoro‑›; related to the cognates of ‹phosphorus›, ‹conifer›, ‹metaphor›. See also: <i><a href="#amphoreus">amphoreús</a>, <a href="#doryphoros">doryphóros</a>, <a href="#doryphoroktonon">Doryphoroktónon</a>, <a href="#megalomyoxiphophoros">megalomyoxiphophóros</a>, <a href="#ouraniodoryphoron">ouraniodoryphóron</a>, <a href="#phosphoros">phōsphóros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phos"><i>phôs<br/>phṓta</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Photon. Literally, “photon”. Still more literally, “light”. Cognate of ‹photon›; related to the cognates of ‹phosphorescent›, ‹photograph›. See also: <i><a href="#phosphoros">phōsphóros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phosphoros"><i>phōsphóros<br/>phōsphóroi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phosphorus. Literally, “phosphorus”, combining <i><a href="#phos">phôs</a>, <a href="#phoros">phóros</a>. </i>Still more literally, “light-bringer”, akin to ‹lucifer›. Generally, associated with <i><a href="#heosphoros">Heōsphóros</a>, </i>and having connotations of enlightenment in <a href="#amphi">both</a> the literal and metaphorical senses. Specifically, refers to the <i><a href="#stoicheion">stoicheîon</a>, </i>phosphorus, <a href="#gnosis">known</a> for <a href="#amphi">both</a> <a href="#auge">glowing</a> and <a href="#kaio">burning</a>. Cognate of ‹phosphorus›, ‹phosphorous›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phratria"><i>phrātríā<br/>phrātríai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phratry. Literally, “phratry”. Still more literally, “brotherhood”. A clan of <i><a href="#polites">polîtai</a>, </i>united by kinship. Cognate of ‹phratry›; related to the cognate of ‹fraternity›, ‹brother›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phthinoporon"><i>Phthinóporon<br/>phthinópora</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “fruit wither”, combining <i>phthínō, opṓra. </i>The <a href="#seasons">season</a> of fall. Related to the cognates of ‹phthisis›, ‹opora›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phylakterion"><i>phylaktḗrion<br/>phylaktḗria</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phylactery. Literally, “phylactery”, referencing <i><a href="#phylax">phýlax</a>. </i>An amulet or <a href="#prostates">protective</a> charm. Cognate of ‹phylactery›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phylax"><i>phýlax<br/>phylakḗs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “guardian” or “protector”. Related to the cognates of ‹prophylactic›, ‹phylaxis›. See also: <i><a href="#politophylax">politophýlax</a>, <a href="#naophylax">naophýlax</a>, <a href="#phylakterion">phylaktḗrion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="phyllopemma"><i>phyllópemma<br/>phyllopémmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Phyllo. Literally, “phyllo”. combining <i>phýllon, pémma. </i>Still more literally, “leaf pastry”. A dough <a href="#poiesis">made</a> into thin sheets, used in heavenly <i><a href="#baklavas">baklavás</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#philia">philíā</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹phyllo›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="physikon"><i>physikón<br/>physikà</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Physics. Literally, “physics”, referencing <i><a href="#physis">phýsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “natural qualities”. Broader than ‹physics›, it encompasses <a href="#pas">all</a> the natural <a href="#episteme">sciences</a>, yet arbitrarily excludes the <a href="#metaphysikon">supernatural</a> <a href="#episteme">science</a> of <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹physics›. See also: <i><a href="#metaphysikon">metaphysiká</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="physis"><i>phýsis<br/>phýseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “nature”. See also: <i><a href="#physikon">physikón</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pilidion"><i>pilídion<br/>pilídia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pileolus. Literally, “pileolus”, from <i><a href="#pilos">pîlos</a>. </i>A skullcap. Cognate of ‹pileolus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pilos"><i>pîlos<br/>pîloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pileus. Literally, “pileus”. Still more literally, “felt” or “wool”. Even more literally, “compressed”, referencing how felt is <a href="#poiesis">made</a>. A brimless cap, either conical or close-fitting, typically <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of these materials. Akin to a toque or beanie. Stereotypically worn by sailors, travelers, and <a href="#hoplites">soldiers</a>. No relation to ‹Pílos›. Cognate of ‹pileus›, ‹pilos hat›, ‹pilos helmet›. See also: <i><a href="#pilidion">pilídion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pinax"><i>pínax<br/>pínakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pinax. Literally, “pinax”. Still more literally, “tablet”, “board”, “panel”, or “plate”. Essentially, <a href="#tis">any</a> convenient flat surface. Cognate of ‹pinax›; related to the cognates of ‹pin‑›, ‹pinacotheca›. See also: <i><a href="#keropinax">kēropínax</a>, <a href="#plax">pláx</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pithos"><i>píthos<br/>píthoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pithos. Literally, “pithos”. A very <a href="#megas">large</a> <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>jar or storage vessel: a vat or cask. Typically characterized by a wide, round mouth and a flat bottom, it stands as tall as a <a href="#aner">man</a> and is oft buried partially to keep cool. Note that — contrary to common mistranslations and misconceptions — neither is it a box, nor difficult to close once opened, nor a suitable place to <a href="#hypnos">sleep</a>. Cognate of ‹pithos›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#amphoreus">amphoreús</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="planetes"><i>planḗtēs<br/>Planêtai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Planet. Literally, “planet”. Still more literally, “wanderer”. Collectively, the <a href="#wanderers">Wanderers</a>. Traditionally, <i><a href="#ge">Gê</a> </i>was excluded on the basis that it was immobile, though this is patently absurd. Cognate of ‹planet›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="plasma"><i>plásma<br/>plásmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Plasma. Literally, “plasma”. Still more literally, “molded” or “formed”. Refers to various distinct yet similarly moldable substances, the most relevant being <i><a href="#aerionismenos">aḗr ionisménos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹plasma›; related to the cognate of ‹plastic›, ‹plaster›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="plateia"><i>plateía<br/>plateîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Plaza. Literally, “plaza”. Still more literally, “broad” or “wide”. Generally, a pubic square, or flat, open space. Specifically, a broad road or avenue, typically running west to east, leading out from the <i><a href="#agora">agorā́</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹plaza›; related to the cognates of ‹plate›, ‹plateau›, ‹platypus›, ‹platform›, <i>‹Plátaia›. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#stenopos">stenōpós</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#plax">pláx</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="plax"><i>pláx<br/>plákes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “flat surface” or “tablet”, referencing <i><a href="#plateia">plateía</a>. </i>Can refer to a <a href="#lithos">stone</a> <a href="#pinax">tablet</a>, a flat expanse of land, or a sheet of <a href="#metallon">metal</a> or <a href="#lithos">stone</a>. No relation to ‹plaque›. See also: <i><a href="#pinax">pínax</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="plektron"><i>plēktron<br/>plēktra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Plectrum. Literally, “plectrum”. Still more literally, “striker”. In <a href="#mousike">music</a>, a pick used to play a <i><a href="#kithara">kithára</a>. </i>In <a href="#mageiros">cooking</a>, a pestle used with <i><a href="#holmos">hólmos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹plectrum›; related to the cognate of ‹pluck›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="plethora"><i>plēthṓra<br/>plēthôrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Plethora. Literally, “plethora”. Still more literally, “fullness”, “abundance”, or “excess”. Cognate of ‹plethora›; related to the cognate of ‹plethysmograph›. See also: <i><a href="#kerastesplethoras">kéras tēs plēthṓras</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#peinaleos">peinaléos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ploiosorer"><i>Ploiosṓtēr</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “ship-saver”, combining <i>ploîon, sōtḗr. </i><a href="#appellation">Appellation</a> of the sailors’ <a href="#theos">god</a>, whose <i><a href="#eikon">Eikṓn</a> </i>is the stylized anchor. Related to cognates of ‹soteria›, ‹soteriology›, ‹savior›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pneuma"><i>pneûma<br/>pneûmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pneuma. Literally, “pneuma”. Still more literally, “breath”, hence spirit or <a href="#zoe">life</a> force. Specifically, the vital essence that separates the <a href="#zoe">living</a> from the <a href="#nekros">dead</a>. Also used metaphorically. Cognate of ‹pneuma›, ‹pneum‑›, ‹pneumo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹pneumatology›, ‹pneumatic›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#psyche">psychḗ</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#aura">áura</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="poiesis"><i>poíēsis<br/>poíēseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Poiesis. Literally, “poiesis”. Still more literally, “creation” or “making”. Cognate of ‹poiesis›, ‹‑poiesis›, ‹‑poieses›; related to the cognates of ‹poetry›, ‹onomatopoeia›. See also: <i><a href="#gesmorphopoias">gês morphopoḯas</a>, <a href="#genos">génos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polis"><i>pólis<br/>póleis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polis. Literally, “polis”. Still more literally, “city-state”. The <a href="#megas">largest</a>-scale political structure allowed by the <a href="#theos">gods</a> since the end of the <a href="#chryseosaion">Golden Age</a>, constituting a <a href="#monos">single</a> city, its <a href="#demos">people</a>, and its laws. Cognate of ‹polis›; related to the cognates of ‹policy›, ‹politics›, ‹metropolis›. See also: <i><a href="#polites">polítēs</a>, <a href="#politikon">politikón</a>, <a href="#politophylax">politophýlax</a>, <a href="#akropolis">Akrópolis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polites"><i>polítēs<br/>polîtai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>
Literally, “citizen”, referencing <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>. </i>A <a href="#aner">man</a> with full civil rights, privileges, and responsibilities, which includes the ability to vote, hold public office, and serve in <a href="#nomike">legal</a> and military functions. Naturally, this excludes <a href="#gyne">women</a>, <a href="#pais">children</a>, dogs, and <a href="#doulos">slaves</a>, as well as <i><a href="#apeleutheros">apeleútheroi</a>, <a href="#barbaros">bárbaroi</a>, </i>and other <i><a href="#metoikos">métoikoi</a>. </i>In other <a href="#lexis">words</a>, these are just those <a href="#aner">men</a> who count, as it ought to be. Some relation to <i>‹Polítēs›. </i>See also: <i><a href="#phratria">phrātríā</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="politikon"><i>politikón<br/>politiká</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Politics. Literally, “politics”, referencing <i><a href="#polis">pólis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹politics›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="politophylax"><i>politophýlax<br/>politophýlakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “citizen guardian”, combining <i><a href="#polites">polítēs</a>, <a href="#phylax">phýlax</a>. </i>City guard: volunteer militia for largely <a href="#telete">ceremonial</a> purposes, such as <a href="#phylax">guarding</a> <i><a href="#prytaneion">Prytaneîon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="poly"><i>polý</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Poly. Literally, “poly”. Still more literally, “many”. Many. Many, many. Many, many, many. No relation to ‹Polly›. Cognate of ‹poly›, ‹poly‑›; related to the cognates of ‹polyandry›, ‹polygyny›, ‹polygamy›, and many, many more. See also the uses that follow, too numerous to list here.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polychromos"><i>polýchrōmos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polychrome. Literally, “polychrome”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#chroma">chrôma</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many colors”. The style of painting <a href="#tektaino">buildings</a> and statuary in <a href="#lampros">bright</a> shades and <a href="#aletheia">realistic</a> skin tones. What a bland <a href="#kosmos">world</a> it would be if <a href="#pas">all</a> we had was white marble, no? Cognate of ‹polychrome›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polyedron"><i>polýedron<br/>polýedra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polyhedron. Literally, “polyhedron”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#hedra">hédra</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many faced (3D <a href="#geometria">geometric</a> shape)”. A solid <a href="#morphe">shape</a> enclosing a volume and formed by <a href="#poly">many</a> planar <a href="#hedra">faces</a>: at least <a href="#tettares">four</a>. No relation to ‹monohedron›, which is not a thing. And while ‹dihedron› and ‹trihedron› are things, or at least <a href="#mathematikon">mathematical</a> objects, neither is a polyhedron. Cognate of ‹polyhedron›. See also: <i><a href="#tetraedron">tetráedron</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#polygonon">polýgōnon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polygamia"><i>polygamía<br/>polygamíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polygamy. Literally, “polygamy”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#gamos">gámos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many marriages”. Cognate of ‹polygamy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#monogmaia">monogamía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polyglottos"><i>polýglōttos<br/>polýglōttoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polyglot. Literally, “polyglot”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#glossa">glôssa</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many tongues”. A multilingual <a href="#prosopon">person</a>. On the <a href="#heis">one</a> hand, the <a href="#ethnos">cultured</a> necessarily learn a few <a href="#glossa">languages</a>; on the other, why should we bother with <a href="#tis">anything</a> other than <i><a href="#koinodialektos">koinodiálektos</a>? </i>Should not we expect the <a href="#xenos">foreigner</a> to learn our tongue? Cognate of ‹polyglot›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#monoglottos">monóglōttos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polygonon"><i>polýgōnon<br/>polýgōna</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polygon. Literally, “polygon”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#gonia">gōnía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many angled (2D <a href="#geometria">geometric</a> shape)”. A planar <a href="#morphe">shape</a> enclosing an area and formed by <a href="#poly">many</a> <a href="#hedra">lines</a>: at least <a href="#treis">three</a>. While a <i><a href="#polyedron">polýedron</a> </i> necessarily has <a href="#poly">many</a> <i><a href="#gonia">gōníai</a>, </i>it is not a polygon, for reasons. The ‹monogon› and ‹digon› are not polygons because, on a flat plane, they are indistinguishable from a line; however, these concepts come in handy for <i><a href="#pyle">pýlai</a>, </i>which depend on the bending of spacetime. No relation to ‹polygram›, ‹PolyGram›. Cognate of ‹polygon›. See also: <i><a href="#trigonon">trígōnon</a>, <a href="#tetragonon">tetrágōnon</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#polyedron">polýedron</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polymorphia"><i>polymorphía<br/>polymorphíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polymorphism. Literally, “polymorphism”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#morphe">morphḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many shaped”. The <a href="#theos">divinely</a>-<a href="#dynamis">powered</a> state of having the ability to wear multiple <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, each as like a garment, through <i><a href="#polymorphosis">polymórphōsis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹polymorphism›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polymorphosis"><i>polymórphōsis<br/>polymorphṓseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polymorphosis. Literally, “polymorphosis”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#morphe">morphḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many shape process”. The act of temporarily changing <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, without altering the <a href="#etymomorphe">true self</a>. Can be self-directed, as with <i><a href="#polymorphia">polymorphía</a>, </i>or external. Not nearly as painful as you might think. Cognate of ‹polymorphosis›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#metamorphosis">metamórphōsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="polytheismos"><i>polytheïsmós<br/>polytheïsmoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Polytheism. Literally, “polytheism”, combining <i><a href="#poly">polý</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “many gods”. Cognate of ‹polytheism›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#monotheismos">monotheïsmós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pompe"><i>pompḗ<br/>pompaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pomp. Literally, “pomp”. Still more literally, “send” or “escort”. A <a href="#telete">ritual</a> procession or <a href="#hieros">sacred</a> <a href="#telete">ceremonial</a> parade, as at a <i><a href="#heorte">heortḗ</a>. </i>Circumstance is optional. No relation to ‹Pompeii›, ‹Pompey›. Cognate of ‹pomp›; related to the cognate of ‹pompous›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pontos"><i>póntos<br/>póntoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pontus. Literally, “pontus”. Still more literally, “sea-path” or “bridge”, referring to the open sea. Cognate of ‹Pontus›; related to the cognates of Cognate of ‹pontic›, ‹pontoon›, ‹pontifex›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#thalassa">thálassa</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="porne"><i>pórnē<br/>pórnai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Porno‑. Literally, “porno‑”. Still more literally, “prostitute” or “whore”. Even more literally, “sold”. Apt, as it is indeed a form of commerce: sex work is work. Cognate of ‹porno‑›, ‹porn‑›; related to the cognate of ‹pornography›. See also: <i><a href="#pornoboskos">pornoboskós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pornoboskos"><i>pornoboskós<br/>pornoboskoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “whore-herder”, combining <i><a href="#porne">pórnē</a>, <a href="#bous">boûs</a>, </i>hence pimp. An appropriately vulgar term for a vulgar occupation.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="poton"><i>potón<br/>potá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Potion. Literally, “potion”. Refers to an ordinary drink, a <i><a href="#pharmakon">phármakon</a>, </i>or even a <i><a href="#goeteia">goētikòn</a> <a href="#philtron">phíltron</a></i>; these potables coming in various degrees of potency. Cognate of ‹potion›; related to the cognate of ‹potable›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pous"><i>poús<br/>pódes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pod‑. Literally, “pod‑”. Still more literally, “foot”. The <a href="#soma">body</a> part and the unit of length based upon it, which is approximately the size of a foot. No relation to ‹pod›, ‹pus›, ‹puss›, <i><a href="#meter">mḗtēr</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹pod‑›, ‹‑pod›, ‹‑pode›; related to the cognates of ‹podiatry›, ‹octopus›, ‹pedal›. See also: <i><a href="#antipous">antípous</a>, <a href="#stadion">stádion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pragmatismos"><i>pragmatismós<br/>pragmatismoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pragmatism. Literally, “pragmatism”. Still more literally, “process of handling deeds”. Cognate of ‹pragmatism›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="praktikos"><i>praktikós<br/>praktikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Practice. Literally, “practice”. Still more literally, “related to the act of doing”. More generally, practicality. Cognate of ‹practice›, ‹praxis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="priesthood"><i>priesthood</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#archiereia">archiéreia</a>, <a href="#archiereus">archiereús</a>, <a href="#hiereia">hiéreia</a>, <a href="#hiereus">hiereús</a>, <a href="#hierarchia">hierarchía</a>, <a href="#hierobasileus">hierobasileús</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="proinos"><i>prōïnós<br/>prōïnoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “morning”, “early”, or “breakfast”, referencing <i><a href="#protos">prôtos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “first time (of the day)”. See also: <a href="#times">times</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pros"><i>prós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pro. Literally, “pro”. Still more literally, “for”, “against”, “in addition to”, “toward”, “from”, “at”, “near”. Cognate of ‹pro›. See also: <i><a href="#protos">prôtos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="prosonymia"><i>prosonymía<br/>prosonymíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Prosonym. Literally, “prosonym”, combining <i><a href="#pros">prós</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>Still more literally, “<a href="#pros">additional</a> <a href="#onoma">name</a>”. Nickname used in place of the <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a>, </i>oft based upon a <i><a href="#hypokorismos">hypokorismós</a>. </i>For <a href="#laos">people</a>, this is what they are <a href="#gnosis">known</a> as and commonly called, though not <a href="#etymos">truly</a> their <a href="#onoma">name</a>. For <a href="#theos">gods</a>, used to avoid <i><a href="#blasphemia">blasphēmía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹prosonym›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#pseudonymon">pseudṓnymon</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="prosopon"><i>prósōpon<br/>prósōpa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “face” or “mask”, combining <i><a href="#pros">prós</a>, <a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>, </i>hence a role, persona, or individual person. Still more literally, “toward appearance” or “toward eyes”, referring <a href="#genos">originally</a> to <a href="#theatron">theatrical</a> masks representing an individual character. Cognate of ‹persona›, ‹personal›. See also: <a href="#people">people</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="prostates"><i>prostátēs<br/>prostátai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Prostate. Literally, “prostate”, combining <i><a href="#pros">prós</a>, <a href="#stasis">stásis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “defender”, “protector”, “patron”. Even more literally, “stands in front”. Cognate of ‹prostate›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#oleter">oletḕr</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#phylax">phýlax</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="protos"><i>prôtos<br/>prôtoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Proto‑. Literally, “proto‑”, referencing <i><a href="#pros">prós</a>. </i>Still more literally, “prime”, “first”, “original”, “primary”. Ordinal form of <i><a href="#heis">heîs</a>. </i>No relation to ‹Protoss› or ‹protoculture›, I think. Cognate of ‹proto‑›, ‹prime›, ‹primary›, ‹primal›; related to the cognates of ‹prototype›, ‹proton›, ‹Proto-Indo-European›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#eschatos">éschatos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="prytaneion"><i>Prytaneîon<br/>prytaneîa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Prytany. Literally, “prytany”. Still more literally, “foremost office”. <a href="#polis">City</a> hall within <i><a href="#akropolis">Akrópolis</a>, </i>and <a href="#oikos">home</a> of <i><a href="#hestiaslithos">Hestías Líthos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹prytany›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pseudomanteia"><i>pseudomanteía<br/>pseudomanteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pseudomancy. Literally, “pseudomancy”, combining <i><a href="#pseudos">pseûdos</a>, <a href="#manteia">manteía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “false divination”. Cold reading, the trick of convincing <a href="#tis">someone</a> you <a href="#gnosis">know</a> what you <a href="#gnosis">know</a> not. Some relation to ‹Pseudomantis›. Cognate of ‹pseudomancy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#nekromanteia">nekromanteía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pseudonymon"><i>pseudṓnymon<br/>pseudṓnyma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pseudonym. Literally, “pseudonym”, combining <i><a href="#pseudos">pseûdos</a>, <a href="#onoma">ónoma</a>. </i>Still more literally, “false name”. An alias <a href="#tis">someone</a> <a href="#kryptos">hides</a> behind, as out of cowardice or shame; for example, a pen name. Obviously, only the most despicable author would <a href="#kryptos">conceal</a> their <a href="#etymos">true</a> identity. What do they have to <a href="#kryptos">hide</a>?<i>! </i>Cognate of ‹pseudonym›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#prosonymia">prosonymía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pseudos"><i>pseûdos<br/>pseúdē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pseudo‑. Literally, “pseudo‑”. Still more literally, “falsehood” or “lie”. Cognate of ‹pseudo‑›, ‹pseudo›; related to the cognate of ‹pseudonym›. See also: <i><a href="#pseudomanteia">pseudomanteía</a>, <a href="#pseudonymon">pseudṓnymon</a>, <a href="#apatao">apatáō</a>, <a href="#dolios">dólios</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="psyche"><i>psychḗ<br/>psychaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Psyche. Literally, “psyche”. Metaphorically, “breath”, hence soul or consciousness. Specifically, the sentient essence that separates the aware from the unaware. Also used metaphorically. Cognate of ‹psyche›; related to the cognate of ‹psychosomatic›. See also: <i><a href="#aura">áura</a>, <a href="#nous">noûs</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#pneuma">pneûma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="psychologia"><i>psychología<br/>psychologíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Psychology. Literally, “psychology”, combining <i><a href="#psyche">psychḗ</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “consciousness study”. Too imprecise to be a <a href="#episteme">science</a>, too ugly to be an <a href="#mousike">art</a>; it is what it is. Cognate of ‹psychology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pygme"><i>pygmḗ<br/>pygmaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pugilism. Literally, “pugilism”. Still more literally, “fist”. The <a href="#agon">sport</a> of boxing. No relation to ‹pygalgia› or the north star. Cognate of ‹pugilism›; related to the cognates of ‹pygmy›, ‹pugnacious›, ‹repugnant›. See also: <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyle"><i>pýlē<br/>pýlai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pylon. Literally, “pylon”. Still more literally, “portal”, “gateway” or “entry”. In the context of the <a href="#theos">divine</a>, a portal connecting <a href="#dyo">two</a> points in space for instantaneous travel, enabling <i><a href="#telemetaphora">tēlemetaphorá</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹pylon›; related to the cognates of ‹pylorus›, <i>‹Thermopýlai›.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyr"><i>pŷr<br/>pyrá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyre. Literally, “pyre”. Still more literally, “fire” or even “fever”. Cognate of ‹pyre›, ‹pyro›, ‹pyro‑›, ‹pyr‑›; related to the cognate of ‹pyromaniac›: a hurtful term. See also: <i><a href="#auge">augḗ</a>, <a href="#kaio">kaíō</a>, <a href="#kapnos">kapnós</a>, <a href="#lampros">lamprós</a>, <a href="#phlox">phlóx</a>, <a href="#spinther">spinthḗr</a>, <a href="#pyrokinesis">pyrokínēsis</a>, <a href="#pyromania">pyromanía</a>, <a href="#pyromanteia">pyromanteía</a>, <a href="#nekropyra">nekropyrā́</a>, <a href="#pyramis">pyramís</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyramidion"><i>pyramídion<br/>pyramídia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyramidion. Literally, “pyramidion”, referencing <i><a href="#pyramis">pyramís</a>. </i>Still more literally, “small pyramid”. The <a href="#pyramis">pyramidal</a> capstone atop an <i><a href="#obeliskos">obelískos</a> </i>or at the apex of a <a href="#megas">larger</a> <a href="#pyramis">pyramid</a>, typically of a more reflective material so as to catch the brilliance of the <a href="#helios">Sun</a>. Cognate of ‹pyramidion›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyramidophthalmon"><i>pyramidophthalmón<br/>pyramidophthalmá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “pyramid eye”, combining <i><a href="#pyramis">pyramís</a>, <a href="#ophthalmos">ophthalmós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyramis"><i>pyramís<br/>pyramídes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyramid. Literally, “pyramid”. Still more literally <i>«pŷr ámis», </i>meaning “fire vessel”, or perhaps from <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> influence; the <a href="#aletheia">truth</a> of it is buried in time. Note that a <i><a href="#tetragonon">tetrágōnos</a> pyramís </i>does not mean a pyramid with four <i><a href="#gonia">gōníai</a>, </i>which would perhaps refer to a <i><a href="#tetraedron">tetráedron</a>; </i>rather, it is a pyramid whose base is a <i><a href="#tetragonon">tetrágōnos</a>, </i>which would make it a square pyramid, having four 
<i><a href="#trigonon">trígōna</a> </i>atop this base. Cognate of ‹pyramid›, ‹pyramid-›, ‹pyramido-›,‹-pyramid›. See also: <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>, <a href="#pyramidion">pyramídion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyrenion"><i>pyrēníon<br/>pyrēnia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyrene. Literally, “pyrene”. Still more literally, “little stone”, “pit”, “kernel”. Can refer to the nucleus <a href="#morphe">forming</a> the core of the <i><a href="#kyttaron">kýttaron</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹pyrene›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyrokinesis"><i>pyrokínēsis<br/>pyrokínēseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyrokinesis. Literally, “pyrokinesis”, combining <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>, <a href="#kinesis">kínēsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “fire movement”. The <a href="#poiesis">creation</a> and <a href="#kratos">control</a> of <a href="#lampros">glorious</a> <a href="#pyr">fire</a>: an especially wonderful <a href="#morphe">form</a> of <i><a href="#telekinesis">tēlekínēsis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹pyrokinesis›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#pyromanteia">pyromanteía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyromania"><i>pyromanía<br/>pyromaníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyromania. Literally, “pyromania”, combining <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>, <a href="#mania">maníā</a>. </i>An insulting term for the perfectly <a href="#physis">natural</a> fascination <a href="#tis">one</a> has with <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>, <a href="#auge">augḗ</a>, <a href="#kaio">kaíō</a>, <a href="#kapnos">kapnós</a>, <a href="#lampros">lamprós</a>, <a href="#nekropyra">nekropyrā́</a>, <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#phlox">phlóx</a>. </i>Of course it is inspiring, yet there is no madness to its appreciation. Rather, any failure to duly appreciate its sublime beauty would be <a href="#etymos">truly</a> mad<i>! </i>This really ought not be a term at <a href="#pas">all</a>. No relation to <i><a href="#pyromanteia">pyromanteía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹pyromania›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="pyromanteia"><i>pyromanteía<br/>pyromanteîai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Pyromancy. Literally, “pyromancy”, combining <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>, <a href="#manteia">manteía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “fire divination”. Soothsaying by gazing into <a href="#phlox">flames</a>; it is not only effective, yet also sublimely beautiful. There exist <a href="#poly">many</a> variations, including <i><a href="#kapnos">kapnoskopía</a> and <a href="#thysia">thyoskopía</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#pyromania">pyromanía</a>, </i>which really shouldn’t be considered an illness, by the way. Cognate of ‹pyromancy›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#pyrokinesis">pyrokínēsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="rhabdos"><i>rhábdos<br/>rhábdoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Rhabdo‑. Literally, “rhabdo‑”. Still more literally, “rod”, “staff”, or “wand”. Refers to a variety of rod-like things, including cudgels. Cognate of ‹rhabdo‑›, ‹rhabdo›; related to the cognates of ‹rhabdovirus›, ‹rhabdomyolysis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="rhetorike"><i>rhētorikḗ<br/>rhētorikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Rhetoric. Literally, “rhetoric”. Still more literally, “study of oratory”. Cognate of ‹rhetoric›. See also: <a href="#threeliteracies">three literacies</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="rhis"><i>rhís<br/>rhînes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Rhino‑. Literally, “rhino‑”. Still more literally, “nose”. The most majestic of organs, and useful at that. No relation to <i><a href="#rhos">Rhôs</a>, </i>I think. Cognate of ‹rhino‑›, ‹rhin‑›, ‹‑rhina›; related to the cognates of ‹rhinoceros›, ‹rhino›, ‹rhinoplasty›, ‹rhinencephalon›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="rhos"><i>Rhôs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>A <a href="#aner">man</a>, and more.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sakcharon"><i>sákcharon<br/>sákchara</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Saccharine. Literally, “saccharine”. Still more literally, “sugar”. <a href="#glykys">Sweeter</a> than <a href="#meli">honey</a>, though not as complex in flavor. No relation to ‹Saks› or ‹Charon›, I think. Cognate of ‹saccharine›, ‹saccharose›. See also: <i><a href="#sakcharonmolybdou">sákcharon molýbdou</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sakcharonmolybdou"><i>sákcharon molýbdou</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sugar of lead”, combining <i><a href="#sakcharon">sákcharon</a>, <a href="#molybdos">mólybdos</a>. </i>A traditional <a href="#glykys">sweetener</a> <a href="#poiesis">made</a> by <a href="#therme">heating</a> vinegar in a <a href="#molybdos">lead</a> vessel, yielding white crystals. Besides its taste, it acts also as a preservative, since it is rather toxic to <a href="#thnetos">mortals</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sandalion"><i>sandálion<br/>sandália</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sandal. Literally, “sandal”. No relation to sand <a href="#leon">lion</a>. Cognate of ‹sandal›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sarothron"><i>sárōthron<br/>sárōthra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sarothrum. Literally, “sarothrum”. Still more literally, “broom”. <a href="#sophia">Unwise</a> to mix with <i><a href="#goeteia">goēteía</a>, </i>despite the temptation, for once begun, it may never stop. Cognate of ‹sarothrum›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sarx"><i>sárx<br/>sarkós</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sarco‑. Literally, “sarco‑”. Still more literally, “flesh” or “meat”. Cognate of ‹sarco‑›, ‹sarc‑›; related to the cognates of ‹sarcophagus›, ‹sarcasm›, ‹sarcoma›, ‹sarcopenia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sauroter"><i>saurōtḗr<br/>saurōtêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sauroter. Literally, “sauroter”. Still more literally, “lizard sticker”, referencing <i>saûra. </i>The butt spike of a <i><a href="#dory">dóry</a> </i>or <i><a href="#xyston">xystón</a>, </i>providing balance, reinforcement, and utility. Adds a bit of heft to the <a href="#dory">spear</a> while making it more wieldy, particularly with <a href="#heis">one</a> hand. More commonly <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> or even <a href="#chalkos">brass</a> than <a href="#sideros">iron</a>, as it allows the <a href="#dory">spear</a> to be planted in the oft-damp ground, where <a href="#sideros">iron</a> might rust. Can be used as a <a href="#dyo">secondary</a> weapon if the spearhead breaks, or to deliver a finishing blow. Cognate of ‹sauroter›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="seasons"><i>seasons</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#cheimon">Cheimṓn</a>, <a href="#ear">Éar</a>, <a href="#theros">Théros</a>, <a href="#phthinoporon">Phthinóporon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="seismiklydon"><i>seismiklýdōn<br/>seismiklýdōnes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “seismic wave”, combining <i>seismós, klýdōn. </i>A surge spawned by an earthquake, hence a tidal wave or tsunami. Cognate of ‹seismic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="selenaion"><i>Selēnaîon</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Selene. Literally, “Selene”. Still more literally, “moon”. Even more literally, “bright”. The Moon, which attends <i><a href="#antichthon">Antíchthōn</a> </i>as its <a href="#physikon">natural</a> <i><a href="#ouraniodoryphoron">ouraniodoryphóron</a>. </i>Though, as it obviously has no gender, the <a href="#lexis">word</a> is <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a>. Cognate of ‹Selene›; related to the cognates of ‹selenology›, ‹selenite›, ‹selenium›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="selenotheos"><i>selēnótheos<br/>Selēnótheoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “moon god”, combining <i><a href="#selenaion">Selēnaîon</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="she"><i>She</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>I mean <a href="#her0">Her</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="she0">She<i>!</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Obviously, I’m referring to <i><a href="#ekdikousa">Ekdikoúsa</a>. </i>Who else might I mean?</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sideros"><i>síderos<br/>síderoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sidero‑. Literally, “sidero‑”. Still more literally, “iron”. Cognate of ‹sidero‑›, ‹sider‑›; related to the cognate of ‹siderite›. See also: <i><a href="#metallon">métallon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="skia"><i>skià<br/>skiaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Skia‑. Literally, “skia‑”. Still more literally, “shade” or “shadow”. More specifically, a type of <a href="#nekrozoos">undead</a> creature. A <a href="#skia">shade</a> can be <a href="#poiesis">created</a> through <a href="#thanatos">death</a> while oathbound under <i><a href="#horkos">hórkos</a>, </i>or due to a failed attempt at <i><a href="#anastasis">anástasis</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹skia‑›, ‹scia‑›; related to <i><a href="#skotos">skótos</a> </i>and the cognates of ‹skiagraph›, ‹skiascope›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#ker">kêr</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#skiamakhia">skiamakhía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="skiamakhia"><i>skiamakhía<br/>skiamakhíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Skiamachy. Literally, “skiamachy”, combining <i><a href="#skia">skià</a>, <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “shadow-fighting”. Metaphorically, <a href="#skia">shadow</a> <a href="#pygme">boxing</a> or mock combat. Cognate of ‹skiamachy›, ‹sciamachy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="skolion"><i>skólion<br/>skólia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Skolion. Literally, “skolion”. Still more literally, “drinking song”. Even more literally, “bent song”, for obvious reasons. These <a href="#oide">songs</a>, common at <i><a href="#symposion">sympósia</a>, </i>are oft improvised and satirical, with each singer taking their turn. Cognate of ‹skolion›, ‹scolion›; related to the cognate of ‹scoliosis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="skoteinosaion"><i>Skoteinòs Aiṓn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “dark aeon”, combining <i><a href="#skotos">skótos</a>, <a href="#aion">aiṓn</a>. </i>The Dark Age of decline.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="skotos"><i>skótos<br/>skótoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Scoto‑. Literally, “scoto‑”. Still more literally, “darkness”. Everyday darkness. No relation to ‹Scotland›, ‹Scoto‑›. Cognate of ‹scoto‑›; related to the cognates of ‹scotophobia›, ‹scotopia›, ‹scotoma›. See also: <i><a href="#erebos">érebos</a>, <a href="#skia">skià</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#zophos">zóphos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="skyphos"><i>skýphos<br/>skýphoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Skyphos. Literally, “skyphos”. A deep <i><a href="#keramike">keramós</a> </i>cup with a flat bottom and a <a href="#dyo">pair</a> of horizontal handles near the rim. Not as fancy as a <i><a href="#kylix">kýlix</a>, </i>yet still it serves to convey <a href="#oinos">wine</a> to its <a href="#moira">destiny</a>. Cognate of ‹skyphos›, ‹skyphus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="soma"><i>sôma<br/>sṓmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Soma. Literally, “soma”. Still more literally, “body”. No relation to the <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> term for <i><a href="#nektar">néktar</a>. </i>No relation to <i><a href="#pharmakon">phármakon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹soma›, ‹soma‑›, ‹‑some›; related to the cognates of ‹somatic›, ‹chromosome›. See also: <i><a href="#anthroposomatheros">ánthrōposôma thērós</a>, <a href="#chromosoma">chromósōma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sophia"><i>sophía<br/>sophíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sophia. Literally, “sophia”. Still more literally, “wisdom”, “skill”, or “cleverness”. No relation to ‹Loren›. Cognate of ‹Sophia› and related to the cognates of ‹sophisticated›, ‹sophistry›, ‹philosophy›. See also: <i><a href="#sophos">sophós</a>, <a href="#sophoglaux">Sophóglaux</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sophoglaux"><i>Sophóglaux</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “wise owl”, combining <i><a href="#sophia">sophía</a>, <a href="#glaux">glaúx</a>. </i>The <a href="#glaux">Owl</a> of <a href="#sophia">Wisdom</a>, <a href="#appellation">appellation</a> of the <a href="#prostates">patron</a> <a href="#theos">god</a> of our <i><a href="#eponymos">epṓnymos</a> <a href="#polis">pólis</a>, </i>whose <i><a href="#eikon">Eikṓn</a> </i>is the stylized <a href="#glaux">little owl</a>. Another <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>is She Who Stays Up At Night.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sophos"><i>sophós<br/>sophoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sophist. Literally, “sophist”, referencing <i><a href="#sophia">sophía</a>. </i>Still more literally, “wise one”, hence scholar, academic, or <a href="#philosophos">philosopher</a>. Cognate of ‹sophist›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sparganon"><i>spárganon<br/>spárgana</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “wrapping bands”. Cloth used to cover or swaddle.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="spathe"><i>spáthē<br/>spáthai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Spatha. Literally, “spatha”. Still more literally, “blade”. Refers primarily to a long, straight, <a href="#dyo">double</a>-edged broadsword favored by light cavalry for its reach and utility. May also refer to a variety of tools with broad, flat blades. Cognate of ‹spatha›; related to the cognates of ‹spathe›, ‹spatula›, ‹spade›, ‹spada›, ‹espada›, ‹epaulet›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kopis">kopís</a>, <a href="#xiphos">xíphos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sphaira"><i>sphaîra<br/>sphaîrai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sphere. Literally, “sphere”. Cognate of ‹sphere›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sphinx"><i>sphínx<br/>sphínges</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sphinx. Literally, “sphinx”. Still more literally, “strangler”. A monstrous <i><a href="#chimaira">chímaira</a>: </i><a href="#gyne">woman</a>-<a href="#kara">headed</a>, <a href="#leon">lion</a>-<a href="#soma">bodied</a>, and <a href="#hyper">overly</a> fond of <i><a href="#griphos">grîphoi</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹sphinx›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="spinther"><i>spinthḗr<br/>spinthêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “spark”. See also: <i><a href="#pyr">pŷr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="spodos"><i>spodós<br/>spodoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Spodo‑. Literally, “spodo‑”. Still more literally, “ash”. Cognate of ‹spodo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹spodomancy›, ‹spodium›, ‹spodumene›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stadion"><i>stádion<br/>stádia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Stadium. Literally, “stadium”. Still more literally, “stand”, referring to a distance covered in a <a href="#monos">single</a> stretch. The track where footraces are held and also the unit of length it is based upon, which is approximately 600 <i><a href="#pous">pódes</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹stadium›, ‹stade›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stasis"><i>stásis<br/>stáseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Stasis. Literally, “stasis”, referencing <i>hístēmi. </i>Still more literally, “stance”, “standing”, “standstill”. In addition to immobility, refers also to a state of <a href="#polis">civic</a> strife and conflict stemming from a political standstill preventing consensus. Cognate of ‹stasis›, ‹static›. See also: <i><a href="#aioniosstasis">Aiṓnios Stásis</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#meta">metá</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stater"><i>statḗr<br/>statêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Stater. Literally, “stater”. Still more literally, “standard” or “weight”. A unit of weight, and therefore a <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> of that weight. As a weight, twice that of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>, </i>which means that a silver <i><a href="#stater">statḗr</a> </i>is worth 2 <i><a href="#drachme">drachmaí</a>, </i>making it equivalent to a <i><a href="#diobolon">dióbolon</a>. </i>A <a href="#chrysos">gold</a> <i><a href="#stater">statḗr</a> </i>is worth 20 <i><a href="#drachme">drachmaí</a>, </i>and <a href="#heis">one</a> <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of <a href="#electrum">electrum</a> is 12. Cognate of ‹stater›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stenopos"><i>stenōpós<br/>stenōpoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Stenopos. Literally, “stenopos”, combining <i>stenós, opós. </i>Still more literally, “narrow path”. Specifically, a narrow street, traditionally running north to south. Cognate of ‹stenopos›; related to the cognate of ‹stenosis›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#plateia">plateía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stigma"><i>stígma<br/>stígmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Stigma. Literally, “stigma”. Still more literally, “prick”, “puncture”, or “brand”. A mark on the skin, whether from a <a href="#kaio">brand</a>, a tattoo, or <a href="#tis">something</a> similar. The connotations are <a href="#oudeteron">neutral</a>. Cognate of ‹stigma›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stoicheion"><i>stoicheîon<br/>stoicheîa</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “one of a series”, hence an element. Still more literally, “walk”. They are to <i><a href="#ennoia">énnoiai</a> </i>as <i><a href="#gramma">grámmata</a> </i>are to <i><a href="#lexis">léxeis</a>. </i>No relation to ‹stochastic›. Related to the cognate of ‹stoichiometry›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="stoikismos"><i>stōïkismós<br/>stōïkismoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Stoicism. Literally, “stoicism”, referencing <i>stoà. </i>Still more literally, “porch”, for obvious reasons. No relation to ‹stochastic›. Cognate of ‹stoicism›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="storge"><i>storgḗ<br/>storgaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “natural affection”. Familial <a href="#love">love</a>: for <a href="#tis">some</a>, it comes <a href="#physikon">naturally</a> and effortlessly; for others, less so. See also: <i><a href="#philostorgos">philóstorgos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="strophion"><i>stróphion<br/>stróphia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “to twist”, referring to how it is wrapped. The breast band, a simple, supportive undergarment worn as needed for comfort and modesty. While quite comfortable, <a href="#poly">many</a> <a href="#gyne">women</a> do not bother with them except when engaging in <a href="#physikon">physical</a> activity, although <a href="#gonos">childbirth</a> certainly <a href="#meta">changes</a> things. Also <a href="#gnosis">known</a> as <i><a href="#apodesmos">apódesmos</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹strophe›, ‹apostrophe›, ‹catastrophe›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="sympatheia"><i>sympátheia<br/>sympátheiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Sympathy. Literally, “sympathy”, combining <i><a href="#syn">sýn</a>, <a href="#pathos">páthos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “feeling together”. Also used in more philosophical contexts to <a href="#phone">speak</a> of the interconnectedness of <a href="#pas">all</a> things. Cognate of ‹sympathy›; related to the cognates of ‹pathos›, ‹pathetic›, ‹pathology›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#empatheia">empátheia</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="symposion"><i>sympósion<br/>sympósia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Symposium. Literally, “symposium”, combining <i><a href="#syn">sýn</a>, <a href="#poton">potón</a>. </i>Still more literally, “drink together”, hence a banquet. It is a sophisticated drinking party filled with wealth, wit, and <a href="#oinos">wine</a>, typically held in the <a href="#oikos">homes</a> of the elite, and following closely on the heels of a <i><a href="#deipnon">deîpnon</a>. </i>Alas, it is by invitation only. Cognate of ‹symposium›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kapeleion">kapēleîon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="syn"><i>sýn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “together with”, “together”, or “with”. See also: <i><a href="#sympatheia">sympátheia</a>, <a href="#symposion">sympósion</a>, <a href="#synekdoche">synekdochḗ</a>, <a href="#synesis">sýnesis</a>, <a href="#synthesis">sýnthesis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="synekdoche"><i>synekdochḗ<br/>synekdochaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Synecdoche. Literally, “synecdoche”, combining <i><a href="#syn">sýn</a>, ekdochḗ. </i>Still more literally, “understood together”. In <i><a href="#rhetorike">rhētorikḗ</a>, </i>a figure of <a href="#phone">speech</a> where a part is used to refer to the whole. Cognate of ‹synecdoche›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="synesis"><i>sýnesis<br/>synéseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Synesis. Literally, “synesis”, combining <i><a href="#syn">sýn</a>, híēmi. </i>Still more literally, “throw together”. Coming to an internal understanding or gaining insight. Cognate of ‹synesis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="synthesis"><i>sýnthesis<br/>synthéseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Synthesis. Literally, “synthesis”, combining <i><a href="#syn">sýn</a>, thésis. </i>Still more literally, “place together”. Composition or combination, resolving apparent contradictions. Cognate of ‹synthesis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="technike"><i>technikḗ<br/>technikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Technique. Literally, “technique”, referencing <i><a href="#tektaino">tektainō</a>. </i>Still more literally, “art”, “craft”, or “skill”. Even more literally, “weave”. Cognate of ‹technique›, ‹technical›. See also: <i><a href="#paideiatechnike">paidéia technikḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tei"><i>têi, tô<br/>taîs, toîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “to the”. The dative definite article, indicating the <a href="#dektes">recipient</a>, in <a href="#theleia">feminine</a> and <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>/<a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively, and then again in plural. See also: <a href="#the">the</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tektaino"><i>tektainō<br/>tektainomen</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “to build” or “to craft”. Related to the cognate of ‹technical›. See also: <i><a href="#technike">technikḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tele"><i>têle</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tele‑. Literally, “tele‑”. Still more literally, “distant”. Cognate of ‹tele‑›, ‹tel‑›; related to the cognates of ‹telescope›, ‹teleport›. See also: <i><a href="#telekinesis">tēlekínēsis</a>, <a href="#telemetaphora">tēlemetaphorá</a>, <a href="#telepatheia">tēlepátheia</a>, <a href="#telephonia">tēlephōnía</a>, <a href="#teleorasis">tēleórasis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="telekinesis"><i>tēlekínēsis<br/>tēlekínēseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Telekinesis. Literally, “telekinesis”, combining <i><a href="#tele">têle</a>, <a href="#kinesis">kínēsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “distant movement”. Mind <a href="#hyper">over</a> matter, fueled by <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>; </i>it moves or cuts or <a href="#desmos">binds</a>. And sometimes, it <a href="#kaio">burns</a>. Cognate of ‹telekinesis›. See also: <i><a href="#pyrokinesis">pyrokínēsis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="telemetaphora"><i>tēlemetaphorá<br/>tēlemetaphoraí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Teleportation. Literally, “teleportation”, combining <i><a href="#tele">têle</a>, <a href="#meta">metá</a>, <a href="#phoros">phóros</a>. </i>Still more literally, “distant carrying across”. Instantaneous movement, as by a <i><a href="#pyle">pýlē</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹teleportation›; related to the cognate of ‹metaphor›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="teleorasis"><i>tēleórasis<br/>tēleoráseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Television. Literally, “television”, combining <i><a href="#tele">têle</a>, <a href="#opsis">ópsis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “distant vision”. Cognate of ‹television›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#telephonia">tēlephōnía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="telepatheia"><i>tēlepátheia<br/>tēlepátheiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Telepathy. Literally, “telepathy”, combining <i><a href="#tele">têle</a>, <a href="#pathos">páthos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “distant feeling”. Communication, directly <a href="#nous">mind</a> to <a href="#nous">mind</a>, <a href="#kata">over</a> great distance at the speed of <a href="#phos">light</a>. What is shared can consist of <i><a href="#ennoia">énnoiai</a>, <a href="#lexis">léxeis</a>, <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#phantasia">phantasíai</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹telepathy›. See also: <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="telephonia"><i>tēlephōnía<br/>tēlephōníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Telephone. Literally, “telephone”, combining <i><a href="#tele">têle</a>, <a href="#phone">phōnḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “distant sound”, hence it refers also to ‹radio›. Cognate of ‹telephone›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#teleorasis">tēleórasis</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="telete"><i>teletḗ<br/>teletaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “ceremony”, “rite”, or “ritual”. Still more literally, “completion”. See also: <i><a href="#mysterion">mystḗrion</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ten"><i>tḕn, tòn, tò<br/>tàs, toùs, tà</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “the”. The accusative definite article, applying to the object <a href="#dektes">receiving</a> the action of the verb, in <a href="#theleia">feminine</a>, <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>, and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively, and then again in plural. No relation to <i><a href="#deka">déka</a>. </i>See also: <a href="#the">the</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tendynamintontheon"><i>tḕn dýnamin tôn theōn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “the power of the gods”, combining <i><a href="#ten">tḕn</a>, <a href="#dynamis">dýnamis</a>, <a href="#tes">tôn</a>, <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>Metaphorically, an <i><a href="#epitheton">epítheton</a> </i>for <i><a href="#manna">mánna</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tes"><i>tês, toû<br/>tôn</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “of the”. The genitive definite article, showing possession, in <a href="#theleia">feminine</a>, <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>/<a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a>, and plural <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively. See also: <a href="#the">the</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tetartemorion"><i>tetartēmórion, tetartēmória</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “(one) fourth portion”, combining <i><a href="#tettares">tétartos</a>, mórion. </i>Specifically, a <a href="#argyros">silver</a> (or sometimes even <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a> or <a href="#chalkos">copper</a>) <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> worth ¼ of an <i><a href="#obolos">obolós</a>, </i>hence a 24<span class="superscript">th </span>of a <i><a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tetradrachmon"><i>tetrádrachmon<br/>tetrádrachma</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “four drachma”, combining <i><a href="#tettares">téttares</a>, <a href="#drachme">drachmḗ</a>. </i>A <a href="#nomisma">coin</a> of that value.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tetraedron"><i>tetráedron<br/>tetráedra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tetrahedron. Literally, “tetrahedron”, combining <i><a href="#tettares">téttares</a>, <a href="#hedra">hédra</a>. </i>Still more literally, “four-faced”. A <i><a href="#pyramis">pyramís</a> </i>with <a href="#tettares">four</a> <a href="#trigonon">triangular</a> faces. Cognate of ‹tetrahedron›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tetragonon"><i>tetrágōnon<br/>tetrágōnos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tetragon. Literally, “tetragon”, combining <i><a href="#tettares">téttares</a>, <a href="#gonia">gōnía</a>, </i>hence a quadrilateral such as a square, a rectangle, a rhombus, or a parallelogram. A <a href="#tettares">four</a>-<a href="#gonia">sided</a> <i><a href="#polygonon">polýgōnon</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹tetragon›. See also: <i><a href="#pyramis">pyramís</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tetragrammaton"><i>tetragrámmaton<br/>tetragrámmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tetragrammaton. Literally, “tetragrammaton”, combining <i><a href="#tettares">téttares</a>, <a href="#gramma">grámma</a>. </i>Still more literally, “four letters”. Cognate of ‹tetragrammaton›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tettares"><i>téttares, téttara, téttares<br/>tetra‑, tétartos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tetra‑. Literally, “tetra‑”. In cardinal (“four”) <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>/<a href="#theleia">feminine</a> and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively, and then again in collective (“tetrad”), combining, and ordinal (“fourth”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to fish. Cognate of ‹tetra‑›, ‹tetr‑›, ‹tetra›, ‹tetrad›; related to the cognates of ‹four›, ‹quarter›, ‹tetragonal›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thalassa"><i>thálassa<br/>thálassai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thallasso‑. Literally, “thallasso‑”. Still more literally, “sea”. Cognate of ‹thallasso‑›, ‹thallass‑›; related to the cognates of ‹thalassic›, ‹thalassocracy›, ‹thalassophobia›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#pontos">póntos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thalassaphros"><i>thalassaphrós<br/>thalassaphroí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sea foam”, combining <i><a href="#thalassa">thálassa</a>, aphrós</i>. Spume, foam, or scum. Related to the cognates of ‹aphrology›, <i>‹Aphrodítē›.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thalassoberyllos"><i>thalassobḗryllos<br/>thalassobḗrylloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sea beryl”, combining <i><a href="#thalassa">thálassa</a>, bḗryllos</i>. Aquamarine: a semi-precious gem, transparent and <a href="#thalassa">sea</a>-<a href="#chroma">colored</a>, with great <a href="#kratos">strength</a> and utility. Related to the cognate of ‹beryl›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thalassolaros"><i>thalassoláros<br/>thalassolároi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sea gull”, combining <i><a href="#thalassa">thálassa</a>, láros. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹Larus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thalassoprasinos"><i>thalassoprásinos<br/>thalassoprásinoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “sea-green”, combining <i><a href="#thalassa">thálassa</a> prásinos. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹prasine›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thanatomiasma"><i>thanatomíasma<br/>thanatomiásmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “death taint”, combining <i><a href="#thanatos">thánatos</a>, <a href="#miasma">míasma</a>. </i>The indelible taint of forced <i><a href="#anastasis">anástasis</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#nekromiasma">nekromíasma</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thanatos"><i>Thánatos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thanatos. Literally, “thanatos”. Still more literally, “death”. The <a href="#poiesis">poets</a> personify this all-too-<a href="#physikon">natural</a> phenomenon as the twin brother of <i><a href="#hypnos">Hýpnos</a>, </i>son of <i><a href="#nyx">Nýx</a>, </i>and perhaps also of <i><a href="#erebos">Érebos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹thanatos›, ‹thanato‑›; related to the cognates of ‹thanatology›, ‹Thanos›. See also: <i><a href="#athanatos">athánatos</a>, <a href="#thnetos">thnētós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thauma"><i>thaûma<br/>thaúmata</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thauma. Literally, “thauma-”. Still more literally, “wonder” or “marvel”. Specifically, a <a href="#theos">divine</a> miracle: the <a href="#akros">highest</a> <a href="#morphe">form</a> of <i><a href="#mageia">mageía</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹thauma‑›; related to the cognates of ‹thaumaturgy›, ‹thaumatology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thaumatomonopolion"><i>thaumatomonopṓlion<br/>thaumatomonopṓlia</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “miracle monopoly”, combining <i><a href="#thauma">thaûma</a>, <a href="#monopolion">monopṓlion</a>. </i>The <a href="#theos">gods’</a> exclusive <a href="#dynamis">power</a> to perform <a href="#thauma">miracles</a>, such as <a href="#iatrike">healing</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="the"><i>the</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>The definite article. See also: <i><a href="#he">hē</a>, <a href="#tes">tês</a>, <a href="#tei">têi</a>, <a href="#ten">tḕn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theatron"><i>théatron<br/>théatra</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Theater. Literally, “theater”. Still more literally, “beheld”. No relation to ‹Calculon›. Cognate of ‹theater›, ‹theatre›. See also: <i><a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a>, <a href="#tragoidia">tragōidía</a>, <a href="#drama">drâma</a>, <a href="#prosopon">prósōpon</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theiamania"><i>theía maníā</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “divine madness” or “divine frenzy”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#mania">maníā</a>. </i>Specifically, the <a href="#metaphysikon">supernatural</a> trance state invoked in combat. More generally, <a href="#tis">any</a> state of <a href="#theos">divinely</a>-inspired <a href="#mania">madness</a> or ecstatic frenzy, including the sort that drives <a href="#tis">someone</a> to absurd literary aspirations that keep them awake <a href="#pas">all</a> <a href="#nyx">night</a> meticulously editing a glossary that <a href="#oudeis">nobody</a> will ever read.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theke"><i>thḗkē<br/>thḗkaì</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Theca. Literally, “theca”. Still more literally, “case”, “chest”, “receptacle”, or “sheath”. Cognate of ‹theca›; related to the cognate of ‹apothecary›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theleia"><i>thḗleia<br/>thḗleiai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “female” or “feminine”. Still more literally, “soft” or “tender”. The defining attribute of <i><a href="#gyne">gynḗ</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#kore">kórē</a>. </i>Related to the cognates of ‹thēlitis›, ‹thylakoid›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#arsenikos">arsenikós</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#arsenothely">arsenóthēly</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thelesis"><i>thélēsis<br/>thélēseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thelema. Literally, “thelema”. Still more literally, “will”. No relation to ‹Crowley›. Cognate of ‹thelema›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="themis"><i>thémis<br/>thémistes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “justice”. <a href="#theos">Divine</a> harmony and structure. Contrast with: <i><a href="#dike">díkē</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#themistokrites">themistokrítēs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="themistokrites"><i>themistokrítēs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “justiciar”, combining <i><a href="#themis">thémis</a>, <a href="#krites">kritḗs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “divine law decider”.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theogoneus"><i>theogoneús<br/>theogoneîs</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “godparent”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#goneus">goneús</a>. </i>Absolute ruler of a <i><a href="#pantheion">pántheion</a>. </i>Typically the <a href="#theos">divine</a> parent of the junior members, having <a href="#anabaino">Ascended</a> them, though sometimes promoted from among these <a href="#gonos">godchildren</a> due to the fading of the <a href="#goneus">progenitor</a>. When <a href="#phone">speaking</a> of a specific <a href="#theos">god</a> that is unambiguously <a href="#arsenikos">male</a> or <a href="#theleia">female</a>, either <i><a href="#theopator">theopátōr</a> </i>or <i><a href="#theometer">theomḗtēr</a> </i>is instead used.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theokratia"><i>theokratíā<br/>theokratíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Theocracy. Literally, “theocracy”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#kratos">krátos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “rule by the gods”. The <a href="#theos">gods</a> obviously <a href="#gnosis">know</a> what is best for all, no? Cognate of ‹theocracy›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theoktonos"><i>theoktónos<br/>theoktónoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “god-slayer”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#ktonos">któnos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theologia"><i>theología<br/>theologíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Theology. Literally, “theology”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “god study”. Take care, as not <a href="#pas">all</a> <a href="#theos">gods</a> like being studied. Cognate of ‹theology›. See also: <i><a href="#paideiaarkanos">paidéia árkanos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theomachia"><i>theomachía<br/>theomachíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Theomachy. Literally, “theomachy”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “battle of the gods”. A war against or among <a href="#theos">gods</a>. Cognate of ‹theomachy›. See also: <i><a href="#titanomachia">Titanomachía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theometer"><i>theomḗtēr<br/>theomḗteres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “godmother”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#meter">mḗtēr</a>. </i>A <a href="#theleia">female</a> <i><a href="#theogoneus">theogoneús</a>. </i>Unrelated to the fairies, I think. Definitely unrelated to ‹thermometer›, and don’t even get me started on <i>‹Theotókos›.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theonkeraunos"><i>theôn keraunós<br/>theôn keraunoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “divine thunderbolt”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#keraunos">keraunós</a>. </i><a href="#heis">One</a> god and <a href="#poly">many</a> are <i><a href="#theos">theoû</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#theos">theôn</a>. </i><a href="#heis">One</a> bolt and <a href="#poly">many</a> are <i><a href="#keraunos">keraunós</a> <a href="#kai">kaì</a> <a href="#keraunos">keraunoí </a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theopator"><i>theopátōr<br/>theopátores</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “godfather”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#pater">patḗr</a>. </i>A <a href="#arsenikos">male</a> <i><a href="#theogoneus">theogoneús</a>. </i>Unrelated to the mob, I think.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theophthalmes"><i>theophthalmḗs<br/>theophthalmáis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “godseye”, combining <i><a href="#theos">theós</a>, <a href="#ophthalmos">ophthalmós</a>. </i>The <a href="#theos">divine</a> <a href="#ophthalmos">eye</a>, rooted deep within the <a href="#kranion">skull</a> at the <i><a href="#konarion">kōnárion</a>. </i>There is nothing particularly evil about it. See also: <i><a href="#aura">áura</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theos"><i>theós<br/>theoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Theo‑. Literally, “theo‑”. Still more literally, “god”. A <a href="#ouranoi">celestial</a> <a href="#basileus">king</a>. Cognate of ‹theo‑›, ‹the‑›; related to the cognates of ‹theism›, ‹atheism›, ‹theology›, ‹theosophy›. See also: <i> <a href="#ouraniotheos">ouraniótheos</a>, <a href="#chthoniotheos">chthoniótheos</a>, <a href="#selenotheos">selēnótheos</a>, <a href="#athanatos">athánatos</a>. </i>Contrast with: <i><a href="#anthropos">ánthrōpos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="ther"><i>thḗr<br/>thḗres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thero. Literally, “thero‑”. Still more literally, “wild animal” or “beast”. Cognate of ‹thero‑›, ‹therio‑›, ‹ther‑›; related to the cognates of ‹Theria›, ‹therology›, ‹theromorph›, ‹theriomorphic›, ‹theriolatry›, ‹therianthropic›. No relation to <i><a href="#theros">Théros</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#anthroposomatheros">ánthrōposôma thērós</a>, <a href="#therokephalos">thēroképhalos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="therme"><i>thérmē<br/>thérmai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thermo-. Literally, “thermo-”. Still more literally, “heat”. Cognate of ‹thermo-›, ‹therm-›, ‹-therm›; related to the cognate of ‹thermal›, ‹endotherm›. See also: <i><a href="#anathermaer">anathermāḗr</a>, <a href="#theros">Théros</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="therokephalos"><i>thēroképhalos<br/>thēroképhaloi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “animal-headed (man)”, combining <i><a href="#ther">thḗr</a>, <a href="#kephale">kephalḗ</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#anthroposomatheros">ánthrōposôma thērós</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="theros"><i>Théros<br/>thérē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “summer” or “harvest”, referencing <i><a href="#therme">thérmē</a>. </i>The <a href="#seasons">season</a> of summer. No relation to <i><a href="#ther">thḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thesauros"><i>thēsaurós<br/>thēsauroí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thesaurus. Literally, “thesaurus”, “wordbook”, “synonymicon”, “antonymicon”, “compendium”. Still more literally, “treasure”, “container”, “storehouse”, “cache”, “repository”. No relation to ‹the lizard›. Cognate of ‹thesaurus›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thnetos"><i>thnētós<br/>thnētoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “mortal”, referencing <i><a href="#thanatos">thánatos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “(capable of) dying”. Contrast with <i><a href="#athanatos">athánatos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thorax"><i>thṓrax<br/>thṓrakes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thorax. Literally, “thorax”. Still more literally, “breastplate”. A cuirass consisting of a breastplate and backplate. Typically <a href="#poiesis">made</a> of <a href="#chalkos">bronze</a>, although there is also the <i><a href="#linothorax">linothṓrax</a>. </i>An essential part of the <i><a href="#panoplia">panoplía</a> </i>of the <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>. </i>Only a <a href="#moron">fool</a> goes into <a href="#machetes">battle</a> without <a href="#heis">one</a>, and such a <a href="#moron">fool</a> deserves to <a href="#thanatos">die</a>. Cognate of ‹thorax›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="threeliteracies"><i>three literacies</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#grammatike">grammatikḗ</a>, <a href="#logike">logikḗ</a>, <a href="#rhetorike">rhētorikḗ</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#paideiaeleutheron">paidéia eleuthérōn</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thronos"><i>thrónos<br/>thrónoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Throne. Literally, “throne”. A <i><a href="#hedra">hédra</a> </i>fit for <i> <a href="#basileus">basileús</a> <a href="#e">ḗ</a> <a href="#theos">theós</a>. </i>Despite their <a href="#lampros">glory</a>, not entirely comfortable to sit in, and yet not easily escaped. Cognate of ‹throne›; distantly related to the cognate of ‹firm›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="thysia"><i>thysía<br/>thysíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Thysia. Literally, “thysia”. Still more literally, “sacrifice” or “offering”. Typically, the <a href="#kaio">burning</a> of fat and <a href="#osteon">bones</a> and entrails on the <i><a href="#bomos">bōmós</a>, </i>with the rest cooked and <a href="#phagos">eaten</a> by the worshipers. Sometimes, to appease angry <a href="#theos">gods</a>, the entire <a href="#ther">animal</a> must be <a href="#kaio">burned</a> to <i><a href="#spodos">spodós</a>; </i>I omit the term for this out of tact. Cognate of ‹thysia›, ‹thusia›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="times"><i>times</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#orthros">órthros</a>, <a href="#proinos">prōïnós</a>, <a href="#mesembria">mesēmbría</a>, <a href="#hespera">hespéra</a>, <a href="#nyx">nýx</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tis"><i>tis<br/>ti</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “someone”, “something”, “anyone”, “any”. The indefinite pronoun, used also in various other forms with closely-related meanings. No relation to ‹tis›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tisis"><i>tísis<br/>tíseis</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “payback”, “retribution”, or “vengeance”. No relation to <i><a href="#tis">tis</a>. </i>See also: <i><a href="#dike">díkē</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="titan"><i>Titán<br/>Titânes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Titan. Literally, “Titan”. The <a href="#protos">first</a> to <a href="#anabaino">Ascend</a> to <a href="#theos">godhood</a>, they are vast, <a href="#dynamis">powerful</a>, and immense. Literally, or perhaps only metaphorically, huge. Cognate of ‹Titan›; related to the cognates of ‹titanic›, ‹titanium›, ‹titanolithic›. See also: <i><a href="#titanikos">titanikós</a>, <a href="#titanomachia">Titanomachía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="titanikos"><i>titanikós<br/>titanikoí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Titanic. Literally, “titanic”, referencing <i><a href="#titan">Titán</a>. </i>Unrelated to near or far or wherever you are. Cognate of ‹titanic›. See also: <i><a href="#megas">mégas</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="titanomachia"><i>Titanomachía</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Titanomachy. Literally, “titanomachy”, combining <i><a href="#titan">Titán</a>, <a href="#machetes">machētḗs</a>. </i>Still more literally, “battle of the titans”. The war in the <a href="#ouranoi">Heavens</a> that laid to waste the <a href="#protos">first</a>-<a href="#gonos">generation</a> <a href="#titan">Titânes</a>. Cognate of ‹titanomachy›. See also: <i><a href="#theomachia">theomachía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tolios"><i>Tólios</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p><i>Tólios </i>was the <i><a href="#hypokorismos">hypokorismós</a> </i>of a petty <i><a href="#lestes">lēstḗs</a> </i>whose <i><a href="#etymonymon">etymṓnymon</a> </i>was <i>Antólios Iōánnou. </i>An insignificant thug unworthy of further consideration, particularly as he is <a href="#nekros">dead</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="topos"><i>tópos<br/>tópoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Topo‑. Literally, “topo‑”. Still more literally, “place”. Cognate of ‹topo‑›, ‹top‑›; related to the cognates of ‹topography›, ‹topology›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tragoidia"><i>tragōidía<br/>tragōidíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tragedy. Literally, “tragedy”, combining <i>trágos, <a href="#oide">ōidḗ</a>. </i>Still more literally, “he-goat song”, for obvious reasons. A serious <i><a href="#drama">drâma</a> </i>about terrible events causing <a href="#anthropos">human</a> suffering, evoking pity and fear. Cognate of ‹tragedy›. See also: <i><a href="#komoidia">kōmōidía</a>, <a href="#theatron">théatron</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="trapeza"><i>trápeza<br/>trápezai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Trapezoid. Literally, “trapezoid”, combining <i><a href="#tettares">tetra‑</a>,  <a href="#pous">poús</a>. </i>Still more literally, “four-footed”. Generally, a geometric <a href="#morphe">shape</a> with <a href="#tettares">four</a> sides, only <a href="#dyo">two</a> of which are parallel. Specifically, a table or stand. Metaphorically, a money-<a href="#meta">changer</a>. Cognate of ‹trapezoid›, ‹trapezium›; related to the cognates of ‹trapeze›, ‹trapezohedron›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="treis"><i>treîs, tría<br/>triás, tri‑, trítos</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tri‑. Literally, “tri‑”. In cardinal (“three”) <a href="#arsenikos">masculine</a>/<a href="#theleia">feminine</a> and <a href="#oudeteron">neuter</a> <a href="#morphe">forms</a>, respectively, and then again in collective (“trio”), combining and ordinal (“third”) <a href="#morphe">forms</a>. No relation to ‹tree›, ‹Cheetos›. Cognate of ‹tri‑›, ‹trio›, ‹triad›, ‹tertiary›, ‹tierce›, ‹terce›; related to the cognates of ‹three›, ‹triple›, ‹triton›. See also: <a href="#numbers">numbers</a>.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="triakontaekklesia"><i>triakontaekklēsía, triakontaekklēsíai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “congregation of thirty”, combining <i><a href="#treis">treîs</a>, ‑konta, ekklēsía. </i>Related to the cognate of ‹ecclesiastic›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="trigonon"><i>trígōnon<br/>trígōna</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Trigon. Literally, “trigon”, combining <i><a href="#treis">treîs</a>, <a href="#gonia">gōnía</a>, </i>hence a triangle. A <a href="#treis">three</a>-<a href="#gonia">sided</a> <i><a href="#polygonon">polýgōnon</a>. </i>No relation to ‹Trigon›, I hope. Cognate of ‹trigon›; related to the cognate of ‹trigonometry›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="tripous"><i>trípous<br/>trípodes</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Tripod. Literally, “tripod”, combining <i><a href="#treis">treîs</a>, <a href="#pous">poús</a>. </i>Still more literally, “three-footed”. Metaphorically, it means <a href="#theos">divine</a> support: for historical reasons. Cognate of ‹tripod›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="trochiodynamike"><i>trochiodynamikḗ<br/> trochiodynamikaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Trochoid dynamics. Literally, “trochoid dynamics”, combining <i>trochós, <a href="#dynamis">dýnamis</a>. </i>Still more literally, “wheel dynamics”, hence orbital dynamics. Related to the cognate of ‹trochoid›. See also: <i><a href="#astronomia">astronomía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="wanderers"><i>Wanderers</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>The <i><a href="#planetes">Planêtai</a>, </i><a href="#oudeis">none</a> of whom are lost. See also: <i><a href="#asteroeides">Asteroeideîs</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="writing"><i>writing</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>See: <i><a href="#epitalaia">epì tà laïá</a>, <a href="#boustrophedon">boustrophēdón</a>, <a href="#epitadexia">epì tà dexiā́</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="xenia"><i>xenía<br/>xeníai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Xenial. Literally, “xenial”, referencing <i><a href="#xenos">xénos</a>. </i>Still more literally, “hospitality” or “guest-friendship”. A bedrock principle of civilization. Cognate of ‹xenial›, <i>‹filoxenía›.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="xenoeisagogikon"><i>xenoeisagōgikó<br/>xenoeisagōgiká</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “foreign introduction”, combining <i><a href="#xenos">xénos</a>, <a href="#eisagogikon">eisagōgiká</a>. </i>A quotation mark to indicate <a href="#xenos">foreign</a> <a href="#lexis">words</a>, using <a href="#monos">single</a> angle braces for ‹English› or <i>‹elliniká›. </i>See also: <i><a href="#orthographia">orthographía</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="xenos"><i>xénos<br/>xénoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Xeno‑. Literally, “xeno‑”. Still more literally, “foreigner” or “stranger”. Cognate of ‹xeno‑›, ‹xen‑›, ‹‑xene›; related to the cognates of ‹xenophobia›, ‹xenobiotic›. See also: <i><a href="#xenia">xenía</a>, <a href="#metoikos">métoikos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="xiphos"><i>xíphos<br/>xíphē</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Xiphos. Literally, “xiphos”. Still more literally, “sword”. A short, straight, <a href="#dyo">double</a>-edged sword with a leaf-<a href="#morphe">shaped</a> <a href="#sideros">iron</a> blade. While suitable for cutting and thrusting, it excels at the stabbing, making it ideal for infantry. Standard sidearm for <i><a href="#hoplites">hoplítēs</a>, </i>used always with <i><a href="#aspis">aspís</a>. </i>Only a <a href="#moron">fool</a> goes into <a href="#machetes">battle</a> with sword <a href="#monos">alone</a>, and such a <a href="#moron">fool</a> deserves to <a href="#thanatos">die</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#kopis">kopís</a>, <a href="#spathe">spáthē</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹xiphos›; related to the cognates of ‹xipho‑›, ‹xiph‑›, ‹xiphoid›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="xyron"><i>xyrón<br/>xyrá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “razor”. Still more literally, “scrape” or “shave”. Note that the phrase, <i>«<a href="#epi">epì</a> xyroû akmês» — </i>“on the razor’s edge” — is an idiom equivalent to ‹on a knife’s edge›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="xyston"><i>xystón<br/>xystá</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Xystum. Literally, “xystum”. Still more literally, “scrape”, relating to how it is <a href="#poiesis">made</a>. A lance perhaps twice the length of a <i><a href="#dory">dóry</a>, </i>likewise with a <i><a href="#sauroter">saurōtḗr</a>. </i>Favored by cavalry as their primary weapon, while using the <i><a href="#kopis">kopís</a> </i>or <i><a href="#spathe">spáthē</a> </i>as the <a href="#dyo">secondary</a>, depending. Cognate of ‹xystum›, ‹xystus›, ‹xyst›; related to the cognate of ‹xyster›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="zoe"><i>zōḗ<br/>zōaí</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Zoo. Literally, “zoo”. Still more literally, “life”. Specifically, as existence or vitality, and sometimes in reference to the <a href="#theos">divine</a>. Cognate of ‹zoo›, ‹zoo‑›, ‹zo‑›; related to the cognates of ‹Zoe›, ‹zoea›. Contrast with: <i><a href="#bios">bíos</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="zone"><i>zṓnē<br/>zṓnai</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Zone. Literally, “zone”. Still more literally, “belt”, “girdle”, or “cincture”. Metaphorically, a zone. Cognate of ‹zone›. See also: <i><a href="#zoster">zōstḗr</a>.</i></p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="zophos"><i>zóphos<br/>zóphoi</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Literally, “gloom”. Darkness that is oppressive, profound, and even <a href="#metaphysikon">supernatural</a>. Contrast with: <i><a href="#skotos">skótos</a>. </i>Cognate of ‹Zophos›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

<div class="pagebreak"/><p class="head"><span class="head" id="zoster"><i>zōstḗr<br/>zōstêres</i></span></p>
<div class="divider-dn"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>
<p>Zoster. Literally, “zoster”. Still more literally, “belt”, “girdle”. A <a href="#genos">type</a> of wide <i><a href="#zone">zṓnē</a> </i>with <a href="#amphi">both</a> <a href="#praktikos">practical</a> and symbolic purposes. Worn <a href="#epi">over</a> a <i><a href="#chiton">chitṓn</a>: </i><a href="#hypo">low</a>-girdled around the waist by <a href="#aner">men</a>, <a href="#hyper">high</a>-girdled under the breasts by women. Cognate of ‹zoster›.</p>
<div class="divider-up"><span class="hidden"> ### </span></div>

</div>
</body>
</html>